THE ILIAD OF HOMER




BOOK I.


How Agamemnon and Achilles fell out at the siege of Troy; and Achilles
withdrew himself from battle, and won from Zeus a pledge that his wrong
should be avenged on Agamemnon and the Achaians.


Sing, goddess, the wrath of Achilles Peleus’ son, the ruinous wrath
that brought on the Achaians woes innumerable, and hurled down into
Hades many strong souls of heroes, and gave their bodies to be a prey
to dogs and all winged fowls; and so the counsel of Zeus wrought out
its accomplishment from the day when first strife parted Atreides king
of men and noble Achilles.

Who then among the gods set the twain at strife and variance? Even the
son of Leto and of Zeus; for he in anger at the king sent a sore plague
upon the host, that the folk began to perish, because Atreides had done
dishonour to Chryses the priest. For he had come to the Achaians’ fleet
ships to win his daughter’s freedom, and brought a ransom beyond
telling; and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the Far-darter upon
a golden staff; and made his prayer unto all the Achaians, and most of
all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the host: “Ye sons of Atreus
and all ye well-greaved Achaians, now may the gods that dwell in the
mansions of Olympus grant you to lay waste the city of Priam, and to
fare happily homeward; only set ye my dear child free, and accept the
ransom in reverence to the son of Zeus, far-darting Apollo.”

Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest and
accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away, and laid stern
charge upon him, saying: “Let me not find thee, old man, amid the
hollow ships, whether tarrying now or returning again hereafter, lest
the staff and fillet of the god avail thee naught. And her will I not
set free; nay, ere that shall old age come on her in our house, in
Argos, far from her native land, where she shall ply the loom and serve
my couch. But depart, provoke me not, that thou mayest the rather go in
peace.”

So said he, and the old man was afraid and obeyed his word, and fared
silently along the shore of the loud-sounding sea. Then went that aged
man apart and prayed aloud to king Apollo, whom Leto of the fair locks
bare: “Hear me, god of the silver bow, that standest over Chryse and
holy Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might, O Smintheus! If ever I built
a temple gracious in thine eyes, or if ever I burnt to thee fat flesh
of thighs of bulls or goats, fulfil thou this my desire; let the
Danaans pay by thine arrows for my tears.”

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him, and came down from
the peaks of Olympus wroth at heart, bearing on his shoulders his bow
and covered quiver. And the arrows clanged upon his shoulders in wrath,
as the god moved; and he descended like to night. Then he sate him
aloof from the ships, and let an arrow fly; and there was heard a dread
clanging of the silver bow. First did he assail the mules and fleet
dogs, but afterward, aiming at the men his piercing dart, he smote; and
the pyres of the dead burnt continually in multitude.

Now for nine days ranged the god’s shafts through the host; but on the
tenth Achilles summoned the folk to assembly, for in his mind did
goddess Hera of the white arms put the thought, because she had pity on
the Danaans when she beheld them perishing. Now when they had gathered
and were met in assembly, then Achilles fleet of foot stood up and
spake among them: “Son of Atreus, now deem I that we shall return
wandering home again—if verily we might escape death—if war at once and
pestilence must indeed ravage the Achaians. But come, let us now
inquire of some soothsayer or priest, yea, or an interpreter of
dreams—seeing that a dream too is of Zeus—who shall say wherefore
Phoebus Apollo is so wroth, whether he blame us by reason of vow or
hecatomb; if perchance he would accept the savour of lambs or
unblemished goats, and so would take away the pestilence from us.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up before them Kalchas
son of Thestor, most excellent far of augurs, who knew both things that
were and that should be and that had been before, and guided the ships
of the Achaians to Ilios by his soothsaying that Phoebus Apollo
bestowed on him. He of good intent made harangue and spake amid them:
“Achilles, dear to Zeus, thou biddest me tell the wrath of Apollo, the
king that smiteth afar. Therefore will I speak; but do thou make
covenant with me, and swear that verily with all thy heart thou wilt
aid me both by word and deed. For of a truth I deem that I shall
provoke one that ruleth all the Argives with might, and whom the
Achaians obey. For a king is more of might when he is wroth with a
meaner man; even though for the one day he swallow his anger, yet doth
he still keep his displeasure thereafter in his breast till he
accomplish it. Consider thou, then, if thou wilt hold me safe.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and spake to him: “Yea, be of
good courage, speak whatever soothsaying thou knowest; for by Apollo
dear to Zeus, him by whose worship thou, O Kalchas, declarest thy
soothsaying to the Danaans, no man while I live and behold light on
earth shall lay violent hands upon thee amid the hollow ships, no man
of all the Danaans, not even if thou mean Agamemnon, that now avoweth
him to be greatest far of the Achaians.”

Then was the noble seer of good courage, and spake: “Neither by reason
of a vow is he displeased, nor for any hecatomb, but for his priest’s
sake to whom Agamemnon did despite, and set not his daughter free and
accepted not the ransom; therefore hath the Far-darter brought woes
upon us, yea, and will bring. Nor will he ever remove the loathly
pestilence from the Danaans till we have given the bright-eyed damsel
to her father, unbought, unransomed, and carried a holy hecatomb to
Chryse; then might we propitiate him to our prayer.”

So said he and sate him down, and there stood up before them the hero
son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, sore displeased; and his dark
heart within him was greatly filled with anger, and his eyes were like
flashing fire. To Kalchas first spake he with look of ill: “Thou seer
of evil, never yet hast thou told me the thing that is pleasant. Evil
is ever the joy of thy heart to prophesy, but never yet didst thou tell
any good matter nor bring to pass. And now with soothsaying thou makest
harangue among the Danaans, how that the Far-darter bringeth woes upon
them because, forsooth, I would not take the goodly ransom of the
damsel Chryseis, seeing I am the rather fain to keep her own self
within mine house. Yea, I prefer her before Klytaimnestra my wedded
wife; in no wise is she lacking beside her, neither in favour nor
stature, nor wit nor skill. Yet for all this will I give her back, if
that is better; rather would I see my folk whole than perishing. Only
make ye me ready a prize of honour forthwith, lest I alone of all the
Argives be disprized, which thing beseemeth not; for ye all behold how
my prize is departing from me.”

To him then made answer fleet-footed goodly Achilles: “Most noble son
of Atreus, of all men most covetous, how shall the great-hearted
Achaians give thee a meed of honour? We know naught of any wealth of
common store, but what spoil soe’er we took from captured cities hath
been apportioned, and it beseemeth not to beg all this back from the
folk. Nay, yield thou the damsel to the god, and we Achaians will pay
thee back threefold and fourfold, if ever Zeus grant us to sack some
well-walled town of Troy-land.”*

Reading with Cobet Τρῳήν for Τροίην.


To him lord Agamemnon made answer and said: “Not in this wise, strong
as thou art, O godlike Achilles, beguile thou me by craft; thou shalt
not outwit me nor persuade me. Dost thou wish, that thou mayest keep
thy meed of honour, for me to sit idle in bereavement, and biddest me
give her back? Nay, if the great-hearted Achaians will give me a meed
suited to my mind, that the recompense be equal—but if they give it
not, then I myself will go and take a meed of honour, thine be it or
Aias’, or Odysseus’ that I will take unto me; wroth shall he be to
whomsoever I come. But for this we will take counsel hereafter; now let
us launch a black ship on the great sea, and gather picked oarsmen, and
set therein a hecatomb, and embark Chryseis of the fair cheeks herself,
and let one of our counsellors be captain, Aias or Idomeneus or goodly
Odysseus, or thou, Peleides, most redoubtable of men, to do sacrifice
for us and propitiate the Far-darter.”

Then Achilles fleet of foot looked at him scowling and said: “Ah me,
thou clothed in shamelessness, thou of crafty mind, how shall any
Achaian hearken to thy bidding with all his heart, be it to go a
journey or to fight the foe amain? Not by reason of the Trojan spearmen
came I hither to fight, for they have not wronged me; never did they
harry mine oxen nor my horses, nor ever waste my harvest in deep-soiled
Phthia, the nurse of men; seeing there lieth between us long space of
shadowy mountains and sounding sea; but thee, thou shameless one,
followed we hither to make thee glad, by earning recompense at the
Trojans’ hands for Menelaos and for thee, thou dog-face! All this thou
threatenest thyself to take my meed of honour, wherefor I travailed
much, and the sons of the Achaians gave it me. Never win I meed like
unto thine, when the Achaians sack any populous citadel of Trojan men;
my hands bear the brunt of furious war, but when the apportioning
cometh then is thy meed far ampler, and I betake me to the ships with
some small thing, yet mine own, when I have fought to weariness. Now
will I depart to Phthia, seeing it is far better to return home on my
beaked ships; nor am I minded here in dishonour to draw thee thy fill
of riches and wealth.”

Then Agamemnon king of men made answer to him “Yea, flee, if thy soul
be set thereon. It is not I that beseech thee to tarry for my sake; I
have others by my side that shall do me honour, and above all Zeus,
lord of counsel. Most hateful art thou to me of all kings, fosterlings
of Zeus; thou ever lovest strife and wars and fightings. Though thou be
very strong, yet that I ween is a gift to thee of God. Go home with thy
ships and company and lord it among thy Myrmidons; I reck not aught of
thee nor care I for thine indignation; and all this shall be my threat
to thee: seeing Phoebus Apollo bereaveth me of Chryseis, her with my
ship and my company will I send back; and mine own self will I go to
thy hut and take Briseis of the fair cheeks, even that thy meed of
honour, that thou mayest well know how far greater I am than thou, and
so shall another hereafter abhor to match his words with mine and rival
me to my face.”

So said he, and grief came upon Peleus’ son, and his heart within his
shaggy breast was divided in counsel, whether to draw his keen blade
from his thigh and set the company aside and so slay Atreides, or to
assuage his anger and curb his soul. While yet he doubted thereof in
heart and soul, and was drawing his great sword from his sheath, Athene
came to him from heaven, sent forth of the white-armed goddess Hera,
whose heart loved both alike and had care for them. She stood behind
Peleus’ son and caught him by his golden hair, to him only visible, and
of the rest no man beheld her. Then Achilles marvelled, and turned him
about, and straightway knew Pallas Athene; and terribly shone her eyes.
He spake to her winged words, and said: “Why now art thou come hither,
thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus? Is it to behold the insolence of
Agamemnon, son of Atreus. Yea, I will tell thee that I deem shall even
be brought to pass: by his own haughtinesses shall he soon lose his
life.”

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene spake to him again: “I came from
heaven to stay thine anger, if perchance thou wilt hearken to me, being
sent forth if the white-armed goddess Hera, that loveth you twain alike
and careth for you. Go to now, cease from strife, and let not thine
hand draw the sword; yet with words indeed revile him, even as it shall
come to pass. For thus will I say to thee, and so it shall be
fulfilled; hereafter shall goodly gifts come to thee, yea in threefold
measure, by reason of this despite; hold thou thine hand, and hearken
to us.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to her: “Goddess, needs
must a man observe the saying of you twain, even though he be very
wroth at heart; for so is the better way. Whosoever obeyeth the gods,
to him they gladly hearken.”

He said, and stayed his heavy hand on the silver hilt, and thrust the
great sword back into the sheath, and was not disobedient to the saying
of Athene; and she forthwith was departed to Olympus, to the other gods
in the palace of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then Peleus’ son spake again with bitter words to Atreus’ son, and in
no wise ceased from anger: “Thou heavy with wine, thou with face of dog
and heart of deer, never didst thou take courage to arm for battle
among thy folk or to lay ambush with the princes of the Achaians; that
to thee were even as death. Far better booteth it, forsooth, to seize
for thyself the meed of honour of every man through the wide host of
the Achaians that speaketh contrary to thee. Folk-devouring king!
seeing thou rulest men of naught; else were this despite, thou son of
Atreus, thy last. But I will speak my word to thee, and swear a mighty
oath therewith: verily by this staff that shall no more put forth leaf
or twig, seeing it hath for ever left its trunk among the hills,
neither shall it grow green again, because the axe hath stripped it of
leaves and bark; and now the sons of the Achaians that exercise
judgment bear it in their hands, even they that by Zeus’ command watch
over the traditions—so shall this be a mighty oath in thine eyes—verily
shall longing for Achilles come hereafter upon the sons of the Achaians
one and all; and then wilt thou in no wise avail to save them, for all
thy grief, when multitudes fall dying before manslaying Hector. Then
shalt thou tear thy heart within thee for anger that thou didst in no
wise honour the best of the Achaians.”

So said Peleides and dashed to earth the staff studded with golden
nails, and himself sat down; and over against him Atreides waxed
furious. Then in their midst rose up Nestor, pleasant of speech, the
clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, he from whose tongue flowed
discourse sweeter than honey. Two generations of mortal men already had
he seen perish, that had been of old time born and nurtured with him in
goodly Pylos, and he was king among the third. He of good intent made
harangue to them and said: “Alas, of a truth sore lamentation cometh
upon the land of Achaia. Verily Priam would be glad and Priam’s sons,
and all the Trojans would have great joy of heart, were they to hear
all this tale of strife between you twain that are chiefest of the
Danaans in counsel and chiefest in battle. Nay, hearken to me; ye are
younger both than I. Of old days held I converse with better men even
than you, and never did they make light of me. Yea, I never beheld such
warriors, nor shall behold, as were Peirithoos and Dryas shepherd of
the host and Kaineus and Exadios and godlike Polyphemos [and Theseus
son of Aigeus, like to the immortals]. Mightiest of growth were they of
all men upon the earth; mightiest they were and with the mightiest
fought they, even the wild tribes of the mountain caves, and destroyed
them utterly. And with these held I converse, being come from Pylos,
from a distant land afar; for of themselves they summoned me. So I
played my part in fight; and with them could none of men that are now
on earth do battle. And they laid to heart my counsels and hearkened to
my voice. Even so hearken ye also, for better is it to hearken. Neither
do thou, though thou art very great, seize from him his damsel, but
leave her as she was given at the first by the sons of the Achaians to
be a meed of honour; nor do thou, son of Peleus, think to strive with a
king, might against might; seeing that no common honour pertaineth to a
sceptred king to whom Zeus apportioneth glory. Though thou be strong,
and a goddess mother bare thee, yet his is the greater place, for he is
king over more. And thou, Atreides, abate thy fury; nay, it is even I
that beseech thee to let go thine anger with Achilles, who is made unto
all the Achaians a mighty bulwark of evil war.”

Then lord Agamemnon answered and said: “Yea verily, old man, all this
thou sayest is according unto right. But this fellow would be above all
others, he would be lord of all and king among all and captain to all;
wherein I deem none will hearken to him. Though the immortal gods made
him a spearman, do they therefore put revilings in his mouth for him to
utter?”

Then goodly Achilles brake in on him and answered: “Yea, for I should
be called coward and man of naught, if I yield to thee in every matter,
howsoe’er thou bid. To others give now thine orders, not to me [play
master; for thee I deem that I shall no more obey]. This, moreover,
will I say to thee, and do thou lay it to thy heart. Know that not by
violence will I strive for the damsel’s sake, neither with thee nor any
other; ye gave and ye have taken away. But of all else that is mine
beside my fleet black ship, thereof shalt thou not take anything or
bear it away against my will. Yea, go to now, make trial, that all
these may see; forthwith thy dark blood shall gush about my spear.”

Now when the twain had thus finished the battle of violent words, they
stood up and dissolved the assembly beside the Achaian ships. Peleides
went his way to his huts and trim ships with Menoitios’ son* and his
company; and Atreides launched a fleet ship on the sea, and picked
twenty oarsmen therefor, and embarked the hecatomb for the god, and
brought Chryseis of the fair cheeks and set her therein; and Odysseus
of many devices went to be their captain.

* Patroklos


So these embarked and sailed over the wet ways; and Atreides bade the
folk purify themselves. So they purified themselves, and cast the
defilements into the sea and did sacrifice to Apollo, even unblemished
hecatombs of bulls and goats, along the shore of the unvintaged sea;
and the sweet savour arose to heaven eddying amid the smoke.

Thus were they busied throughout the host; but Agamemnon ceased not
from the strife wherewith he threatened Achilles at the first; he spake
to Talthybios and Eurybates that were his heralds and nimble squires:
“Go ye to the tent of Achilles Peleus’ son, and take Briseis of the
fair cheeks by the hand and lead her hither; and if he give her not,
then will I myself go, and more with me, and seize her; and that will
be yet more grievous for him.”

So saying he sent them forth, and laid stern charge upon them.
Unwillingly went they along the beach of the unvintaged sea, and came
to the huts and ships of the Myrmidons. Him found they sitting beside
his hut and black ship; nor when he saw them was Achilles glad. So they
in dread and reverence of the king stood, and spake to him no word, nor
questioned him. But he knew in his heart, and spake to them: “All hail,
ye heralds, messengers of Zeus and men, come near; ye are not guilty in
my sight, but Agamemnon that sent you for the sake of the damsel
Briseis. Go now, heaven-sprung Patroklos, bring forth the damsel, and
give them her to lead away. Moreover, let the twain themselves be my
witnesses before the face of the blessed gods and mortal men, yea and
of him, that king untoward, against the day when there cometh need of
me hereafter to save them all from shameful wreck. Of a truth he raveth
with baleful mind, and hath not knowledge to look before and after,
that so his Achaians might battle in safety beside their ships.”

So said he, and Patroklos hearkened to his dear comrade, and led forth
from the hut Briseis of the fair cheeks, and gave them her to lead
away. So these twain took their way back along the Achaians’ ships, and
with them went the woman all unwilling. Then Achilles wept anon, and
sat him down apart, aloof from his comrades on the beach of the grey
sea, gazing across the boundless main; he stretched forth his hands and
prayed instantly to his dear mother: “Mother, seeing thou didst of a
truth bear me to so brief span of life, honour at the least ought the
Olympian to have granted me, even Zeus that thundereth on high; but now
doth he not honour me, no, not one whit. Verily Atreus’ son,
wide-ruling Agamemnon, hath done me dishonour; for he hath taken away
my meed of honour and keepeth her of his own violent deed.”

So spake he weeping, and his lady mother heard him as she sate in the
sea-depths beside her aged sire. With speed arose she from the grey
sea, like a mist, and sate her before the face of her weeping son, and
stroked him with her hand, and spake and called on his name: “My child,
why weepest thou? What sorrow hath entered into they heart? Speak it
forth, hide it not in thy mind, that both may know it.”

Then with heavy moan Achilles fleet of foot spake to her: “Thou knowest
it; why should I tell this to thee that knowest all! We had fared to
Thebe, the holy city of Eëtion, and laid it waste and carried hither
all the spoils. So the sons of the Achaians divided among them all
aright; and for Atreides they set apart Chryseis of the fair cheeks.
But Chryses, priest of Apollo the Far-darter, came unto the fleet ships
of the mail-clad Achaians to win his daughter’s freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling, and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff, and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host. Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest
and accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away and laid stern
charge upon him. So the old man went back in anger; and Apollo heard
his prayers, seeing he loved him greatly, and he aimed against the
Argives his deadly darts. So the people began to perish in multitudes,
and the god’s shafts ranged everywhither throughout the wide host of
the Achaians. Then of full knowledge the seer declared to us the oracle
of the Far-darter. Forthwith I first bade propitiate the god; but wrath
gat hold upon Atreus’ son thereat, and anon he stood up and spake a
threatening word, that hath now been accomplished. Her the
glancing-eyed Achaians are bringing on their fleet ship to Chryse, and
bear with them offerings to the king; and the other but now the heralds
went and took from my hut, even the daughter of Briseus, whom the sons
of the Achaians gave me. Thou therefore, if indeed thou canst, guard
thine own* son; betake thee to Olympus and beseech Zeus by any deed or
word whereby thou ever didst make glad his heart. For oft have I heard
thee proclaiming in my father’s halls and telling that thou alone amid
the immortals didst save the son of Kronos, lord of the storm-cloud,
from shameful wreck, when all the other Olympians would have bound him,
even Hera and Poseidon and Pallas Athene. Then didst thou, O goddess,
enter in and loose him from his bonds, having with speed summoned to
high Olympus him of the hundred arms whom gods call Briareus, but all
men call Aigaion; for he is mightier even than his father—so he sate
him by Kronion’s side rejoicing in his triumph, and the blessed gods
feared him withal and bound not Zeus. This bring thou to his
remembrance and sit by him and clasp his knees, if perchance he will
give succour to the Trojans; and for the Achaians, hem them among their
ships’ sterns about the bay, given over to slaughter; that they may
make trial of their king, and that even Atreides, wide-ruling
Agamemnon, may perceive his blindness, in that he honoured not at all
the best of the Achaians.”

* Reading ἑοῖο.


Then Thetis weeping made answer to him: “Ah me, my child, why reared I
thee, cursed in my motherhood? Would thou hadst been left tearless and
griefless amid the ships, seeing thy lot is very brief and endureth no
long while; but now art thou made short-lived alike and lamentable
beyond all men; in an evil hour I bare thee in our halls. But I will go
myself to snow-clad Olympus to tell this thy saying to Zeus, whose joy
is in the thunder*, if perchance he may hearken to me. But tarry thou
now amid thy fleet-faring ships, and continue wroth with the Achaians,
and refrain utterly from battle: for Zeus went yesterday to Okeanos,
unto the noble Ethiopians for a feast, and all the gods followed with
him; but on the twelfth day will he return to Olympus, and then will I
fare to Zeus’ palace of the bronze threshold, and will kneel to him and
think to win him.”

* perhaps rather, “hurler of the thunderbolt.”


So saying she went her way and left him there, vexed in spirit for the
fair-girdled woman’s sake, whom they had taken perforce despite his
will: and meanwhile Odysseus came to Chryse with the holy hecatomb.
When they were now entered within the deep haven, they furled their
sails and laid them in the black ship, and lowered the mast by the
forestays and brought it to the crutch with speed, and rowed her with
oars to the anchorage. Then they cast out the mooring stones and made
fast the hawsers, and so themselves went forth on to the sea-beach, and
forth they brought the hecatomb for the Far-darter Apollo, and forth
came Chryseis withal from the seafaring ship. Then Odysseus of many
counsels brought her to the altar and gave her into her father’s arms,
and spake unto him: “Chryses, Agamemnon king of men sent me hither to
bring thee thy daughter, and to offer to Phoebus a holy hecatomb on the
Danaans’ behalf, wherewith to propitiate the king that hath now brought
sorrow and lamentation on the Argives.”

So saying he gave her to his arms, and he gladly took his dear child;
and anon they set in order for the god the holy hecatomb about his
well-builded altar; next washed they their hands and took up the barley
meal. Then Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud for them:
“Hearken to me, god of the silver bow that standest over Chryse and
holy Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might; even as erst thou heardest
my prayer, and didst me honour, and mightily afflictest the people of
the Achaians, even so now fulfil me this my desire: remove thou from
the Danaans forthwith the loathly pestilence.”

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Now when they had
prayed and sprinkled the barley meal, first they drew back the victims’
heads and slaughtered them and flayed them, and cut slices from the
thighs and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid raw
collops thereon, and the old man burnt them on cleft wood and made
libation over them of gleaming wine; and at his side the young men in
their hands held five-pronged forks. Now when the thighs were burnt and
they had tasted the vitals, then sliced they all the rest and pierced
it through with spits, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off
again. So when they had rest from the task and had made ready the
banquet, they feasted, nor was their heart aught stinted of the fair
banquet. But when they had put away from them the desire of meat and
drink, the young men crowned the bowls with wine, and gave each man his
portion after the drink-offering had been poured into the cups. So all
day long worshipped they the god with music, singing the beautiful
paean, the sons of the Achaians making music to the Far-darter;* and
his heart was glad to hear. And when the sun went down and darkness
came on them, they laid them to sleep beside the ship’s hawsers; and
when rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, the child of morning, then set they
sail for the wide camp of the Achaians; and Apollo the Far-darter sent
them a favouring gale. They set up their mast and spread the white
sails forth, and the wind filled the sail’s belly and the dark wave
sang loud about the stem as the ship made way, and she sped across the
wave, accomplishing her journey. So when they were now come to the wide
camp of the Achaians, they drew up their black ship to land high upon
the sands, and set in line the long props beneath her; and themselves
were scattered amid their huts and ships.

* Or, “the Averter” (of pestilence).


But he sat by his swift-faring ships, still wroth, even the
heaven-sprung son of Peleus, Achilles fleet of foot; he betook him
neither to the assembly that is the hero’s glory, neither to war, but
consumed his heart in tarrying in his place, and yearned for the
war-cry and for battle.

Now when the twelfth morn thereafter was come, then the gods that are
for ever fared to Olympus all in company, led of Zeus. And Thetis
forgat not her son’s charge, but rose up from the sea-wave, and at
early morn mounted up to great heaven and Olympus. There found she
Kronos’ son of the far-sounding voice sitting apart from all on the
topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus. So she sat before his face and
with her left hand clasped his knees, and with her right touched him
beneath his chin, and spake in prayer to king Zeus son of Kronos:
“Father Zeus, if ever I gave thee aid amid the immortal gods, whether
by word or deed, fulfil thou this my desire: do honour to my son, that
is doomed to earliest death of all men: now hath Agamemnon king of men
done him dishonour, for he hath taken away his meed of honour and
keepeth her of his own violent deed. But honour thou him, Zeus of
Olympus, lord of counsel; grant thou victory to the Trojans the while
until the Achaians do my son honour and exalt him with recompense.”

So spake she; but Zeus the cloud-gatherer said no word to her, and sat
long time in silence. But even as Thetis had clasped his knees, so held
she by him clinging, and questioned him yet a second time: “Promise me
now this thing verily, and bow thy head thereto; or else deny me,
seeing there is naught for thee to fear; that I may know full well how
I among all gods am least in honour.”

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer, sore troubled, spake to her: “Verily it
is a sorry matter, if thou wilt set me at variance with Hera, whene’er
she provoketh me with taunting words. Even now she upbraideth me ever
amid the immortal gods, and saith that I aid the Trojans in battle. But
do thou now depart again, lest Hera mark aught; and I will take thought
for these things to fulfil them. Come now, I will bow my head to thee,
that thou mayest be of good courage; for that, of my part, is the
surest token amid the immortals; no word of mine is revocable nor false
nor unfulfilled when the bowing of my head hath pledged it.”

Kronion spake, and bowed his dark brow, and the ambrosial locks waved
from the king’s immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake.

Thus the twain took counsel and parted; she leapt therewith into the
deep sea from glittering Olympus, and Zeus fared to his own palace. All
the gods in company arose from their seats before their father’s face;
neither ventured any to await his coming, but stood up all before him.
So he sate him there upon his throne; but Hera saw, and was not
ignorant how that the daughter of the Ancient of the sea, Thetis the
silver-footed, had devised counsel with him. Anon with taunting words
spake she to Zeus the son of Kronos: “Now who among the gods, thou
crafty of mind, hath devised counsel with thee? It is ever thy good
pleasure to hold aloof from me and in secret meditation to give thy
judgments, nor of thine own good will hast thou ever brought thyself to
declare unto me the thing thou purposest.”

Then the father of gods and men made answer her: “Hera, think not thou
to know all my sayings; hard they are for thee, even though thou art my
wife. But whichsoever it is seemly for thee to hear, none sooner than
thou shall know, be he god or man. Only when I will to take thought
aloof from the gods, then do not thou ask of every matter nor make
question.”

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen made answer to him. “Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? Yea, surely of old I have
not asked thee nor made question, but in my heart sore afraid lest thou
have been won over by silver-footed Thetis, daughter of the Ancient of
the sea, for she at early morn sat by thee and clasped thy knees. To
her I deem thou gavest a sure pledge that thou wilt do honour to
Achilles, and lay many low beside the Achaians’ ships.”

To her made answer Zeus the cloud-gatherer: “Lady, Good lack! ever art
thou imagining, nor can I escape thee; yet shalt thou in no wise have
power to fulfil, but wilt be the further from my heart; that shall be
even the worse for thee. And if it be so, then such must my good
pleasure be. Abide thou in silence and hearken to my bidding, lest all
the gods that are in Olympus keep not off from thee my visitation, when
I put forth my hands unapproachable against thee.”

He said, and Hera the ox-eyed queen was afraid, and sat in silence,
curbing her heart; but throughout Zeus’ palace the gods of heaven were
troubled. Then Hephaistos the famed craftsman began to make harangue
among them, to do kindness to his mother, white-armed Hera: “Verily
this will be a sorry matter, neither any more endurable, if ye twain
thus fight for mortals’ sakes, and bring wrangling among the gods;
neither will there any more be joy of the goodly feast, seeing that
evil triumpheth. So I give counsel to my mother, though herself is
wise, to do kindness to our dear father Zeus, that our father upbraid
us not again and cast the banquet in confusion. What if the Olympian,
the lord of the lightning, will to dash us from our seats! for he is
strongest far. Nay, approach thou him with gentle words, then will the
Olympian forthwith be gracious unto us.”

So speaking he rose up and sat in his dear mother’s hand the
twy-handled cup, and spake to her: “Be of good courage, mother mine,
and endure, though thou art vexed, lest I behold thee, thou art so
dear, chastised before mine eyes, and then shall I not be able for all
my sorrow to save thee; for the Olympian is a hard foe to face. Yea,
once ere this, when I was fain to save thee, he caught me by my foot
and hurled me from the heavenly threshold; all day I flew, and at the
set of sun I fell in Lemnos, and little life was in me. There did the
Sintian folk forthwith tend me for my fall.”

He spake, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled, and smiling took the
cup at her son’s hand. Then he poured wine to all the other gods from
right to left, ladling the sweet nectar from the bowl. And laughter
unquenchable arose amid the blessed gods to see Hephaistos bustling
through the palace.

So feasted they all day till the setting of the sun; nor was their soul
aught stinted of the fair banquet, nor of the beauteous lyre that
Apollo held, and the Muses singing alternately with sweet voice.

Now when the bright light of the sun was set, these went each to his
own house to sleep, where each one had his palace made with cunning
device by famed Hephaistos the lame god; and Zeus the Olympian, the
lord of lightning, departed to his couch where he was wont of old to
take his rest, whenever sweet sleep visited him. There went he up and
slept, and beside him was Hera of the golden throne.




BOOK II.


How Zeus beguiled Agamemnon by a dream; and of the assembly of the
Achaians and their marching forth to battle. And of the names and
numbers of the hosts of the Achaians and the Trojans.


Now all other gods and chariot-driving men slept all night long, only
Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep; rather was he pondering in his
heart how he should do honour to Achilles and destroy many beside the
Achaians’ ships. And this design seemed to his mind the best, to wit,
to send a baneful dream upon Agamemnon son of Atreus. So he spake, and
uttered to him winged words: “Come now, thou baneful Dream, go to the
Achaians’ fleet ships, enter into the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and tell him every word plainly as I charge thee. Bid him call to arms
the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now he may take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang.”

So spake he, and the Dream went his way when he had heard the charge.
With speed he came to the Achaians’ fleet ships, and went to Agamemnon
son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and ambrosial slumber
poured over him. So he stood over his head in seeming like unto the son
of Neleus, even Nestor, whom most of all the elders Agamemnon honoured;
in his likeness spake to him the heavenly Dream:

“Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses? To sleep all night
through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to whom peoples are
entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken straightway to me,
for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he be afar yet hath
great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to arms the
flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou mayest take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy heart, not let
forgetfulness come upon thee when honeyed sleep shall leave thee.”

So spake the Dream, and departed and left him there, deeming in his
mind things that were not to be fulfilled. For indeed he thought to
take Priam’s city that very day; fond man, in that he knew not the
plans that Zeus had in mind, who was willed to bring yet more grief and
wailing on Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn
fights. Then woke he from sleep, and the heavenly voice was in his
ears. So he rose up sitting, and donned his soft tunic, fair and
bright, and cast around him his great cloak, and beneath his glistering
feet he bound his fair sandals, and over his shoulders cast his
silver-studded sword, and grasped his sires’ sceptre, imperishable for
ever, wherewith he took his way amid the mail-clad Achaians’ ships.

Now went the goddess Dawn to high Olympus, foretelling daylight to Zeus
and all the immortals; and the king bade the clear-voiced heralds
summon to the assembly the flowing-haired Achaians. So did those
summon, and these gathered with speed.

But first the council of the great-hearted elders met beside the ship
of king Nestor the Pylos-born. And he that had assembled them framed
his cunning counsel: “Hearken, my friends. A dream from heaven came to
me in my sleep through the ambrosial night, and chiefly to goodly
Nestor was very like in shape and bulk and stature. And it stood over
my head and charged me saying: ‘Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer
of horses? To sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a
counsellor, to whom peoples are entrusted and so many cares belong. But
now hearken straightway to me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus,
who though he be afar yet hath great care for thee and pity. He biddeth
thee call to arms the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that
now thou mayest take the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the
immortals that dwell in the palaces of Olympus are no longer divided in
counsel, since Hera hath turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and
over the Trojans sorrows hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep
this in thy heart.’ So spake the dream and was flown away, and sweet
sleep left me. So come, let us now call to arms as we may the sons of
the Achaians. But first I will speak to make trial of them as is
fitting, and bid them flee with their benched ships; only do ye from
this side and from that speak to hold them back.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them Nestor,
who was king of sandy Pylos. He of good intent made harangue to them
and said: “My friends, captains and rulers of the Argives, had any
other of the Achaians told us this dream we might deem it a false
thing, and rather turn away therefrom; but now he hath seen it who of
all Achaians avoweth himself far greatest. So come, let us call to arms
as we may the sons of the Achaians.”

So spake he, and led the way forth from the council, and all the other
sceptred chiefs rose with him and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and
the people hastened to them. Even as when the tribes of thronging bees
issue from the hollow rock, ever in fresh procession, and fly
clustering among the flowers of spring, and some on this hand and some
on that fly thick; even so from ships and huts before the low beach
marched forth their many tribes by companies to the place of assembly.
And in their midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them
to go; and so they gathered. And the place of assemblage was in an
uproar, and the earth echoed again as the hosts sate them down, and
there was turmoil. Nine heralds restrained them with shouting, if
perchance they might refrain from clamour, and hearken to their kings,
the fosterlings of Zeus. And hardly at the last would the people sit,
and keep them to their benches and cease from noise. Then stood up lord
Agamemnon bearing his sceptre, that Hephaistos had wrought curiously.
Hephaistos gave it to king Zeus son of Kronos, and then Zeus gave it to
the messenger-god the slayer of Argus;* and king Hermes gave it to
Pelops the charioteer, and Pelops again gave it to Atreus shepherd of
the host. And Atreus dying left it to Thyestes rich in flocks, and
Thyestes in his turn left it to Agamemnon to bear, that over many
islands and all Argos he should be lord. Thereon he leaned and spake
his saying to the Argives:

* Or, possibly, “the swift-appearing”


“My friends, Danaan warriors, men of Ares’ company, Zeus Kronos’ son
hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of soul; hard of heart
is he, for that erewhile he promised me and pledged his nod that not
till I had wasted well-walled Ilios should I return; but now see I that
he planned a cruel wile and biddeth me return to Argos dishonoured,
with the loss of many of my folk. So meseems it pleaseth most mighty
Zeus, who hath laid low the head of many a city, yea, and shall lay
low; for his is highest power. Shame is this even for them that come
after to hear; how so goodly and great a folk of the Achaians thus
vainly warred a bootless war, and fought scantier enemies, and no end
thereof is yet seen. For if perchance we were minded, both Achaians and
Trojans, to swear a solemn truce, and to number ourselves, and if the
Trojans should gather together all that have their dwellings in the
city, and we Achaians should marshal ourselves by tens, and every
company choose a Trojan to pour their wine, then would many tens lack a
cup-bearer: so much, I say, do the sons of the Achaians outnumber the
Trojans that dwell within the city. But allies from many cities, even
warriors that wield the spear, are therein, and they hinder me
perforce, and for all my will suffer me not to waste the populous
citadel of Ilios. Already have nine years of great Zeus passed away,
and our ships’ timbers have rotted and the tackling is loosed; while
there our wives and little children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet
is our task utterly unaccomplished wherefor we came hither. So come,
even as I bid let us all obey. Let us flee with our ships to our dear
native land; for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy.”

So spake he, and stirred the spirit in the breasts of all throughout
the multitude, as many as had not heard the council. And the assembly
swayed like high sea-waves of the Icarian Main that east wind and south
wind raise, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus; and even
as when the west wind cometh to stir a deep cornfield with violent
blast, and the ears bow down, so was all the assembly stirred, and they
with shouting hasted toward the ships; and the dust from beneath their
feet rose and stood on high. And they bade each man his neighbor to
seize the ships and drag them into the bright salt sea, and cleared out
the launching-ways, and the noise went up to heaven of their hurrying
homewards; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.

Then would the Argives have accomplished their return against the will
of fate, but that Hera spake a word to Athene: “Out on it, daughter of
aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Shall the Argives thus indeed
flee homeward to their dear native land over the sea’s broad back? But
they would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of
Argos, for whose sake many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far away
from his dear native land. But go thou now amid the host of the
mail-clad Achaians; with thy gentle words refrain thou every man,
neither suffer them to draw their curved ships down to the salt sea.”

So spake she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not; but
went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came with speed to the
fleet ships of the Achaians. There found she Odysseus standing, peer of
Zeus in counsel, neither laid he any hand upon his decked black ship,
because grief had entered into his heart and soul. And bright-eyed
Athene stood by him and said: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus
of many devices, will ye indeed fling yourselves upon your benched
ships to flee homeward to your dear native land? But ye would leave to
Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos, for whose sake
many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land.
But go thou now amid the host of the Achaians, and tarry not; and with
gentle words refrain every man, neither suffer them to draw their
curved ships down to the salt sea.”

So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking to him, and
set him to run, and cast away his mantle, the which his herald gathered
up, even Eurybates of Ithaca, that waited on him. And himself he went
to meet Agamemnon son of Atreus, and at his hand received the sceptre
of his sires, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his way amid the
ships of the mail-clad Achaians.

Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, he stood by
his side, and refrained him with gentle words: “Good sir, it is not
seemly to affright thee like a coward, but do thou sit thyself and make
all thy folk sit down. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the
purpose of Atreus’ son; now is he but making trial, and soon he will
afflict the sons of the Achaians. And heard we not all of us what he
spake in the council? Beware lest in his anger he evilly entreat the
sons of the Achaians. For proud is the soul of heaven-fostered kings;
because their honour is of Zeus, and the god of counsel loveth them.”*

Reading διοτρεφέων βασιλήων with Zenodotos.


But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he
drave with his sceptre and chode him with loud words: “Good sir, sit
still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters; but thou
art no warrior, and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in
council. In no wise can we Achaians all be kings here. A multitude of
masters is no good thing; let there be one master, one king, to whom
the son of crooked-counselling Kronos hath granted it, [even the
sceptre and judgments, that he may rule among you”].

So masterfully ranged he the host; and they hasted back to the assembly
from ships and huts, with noise as when a wave of loud-sounding sea
roareth on the long beach and the main resoundeth.

Now all the rest sat down and kept their place upon the benches, only
Thersites still chattered on, the uncontrolled of speech, whose mind
was full of words many and disorderly, wherewith to strive against the
chiefs idly and in no good order, but even as he deemed that he should
make the Argives laugh. And he was ill-favored beyond all men that came
to Ilios. Bandy-legged was he, and lame of one foot, and his two
shoulders rounded, arched down upon his chest; and over them his head
was warped, and a scanty stubble sprouted on it. Hateful was he to
Achilles above all and to Odysseus, for them he was wont to revile. But
now with shrill shout he poured forth his upbraidings upon goodly
Agamemnon. With him the Achaians were sore vexed and had indignation in
their souls. But he with loud shout spake and reviled Agamemnon:
“Atreides, for what art thou now ill content and lacking? Surely thy
huts are full of bronze and many women are in they huts, the chosen
spoils that we Achaians give thee first of all, whene’er we take a
town. Can it be that thou yet wantest gold as well, such as some one of
the horse-taming Trojans may bring from Ilios to ransom his son, whom I
perchance or some other Achaian have led captive; or else some young
girl, to know in love, whom thou mayest keep apart to thyself? But it
is not seemly for one that is their captain to bring the sons of the
Achaians to ill. Soft fools, base things of shame, ye women of Achaia
and men no more, let us depart home with our ships, and leave this
fellow here in Troy-land to gorge him with meeds of honour, that he may
see whether our aid avail him aught or no; even he that hath now done
dishonour to Achilles, a far better man than he; for he hath taken away
his meed of honour and keepeth it by his own violent deed. Of a very
surety is there no wrath at all in Achilles’ mind, but he is slack;
else this despite, thou son of Atreus, were thy last.”

So spake Thersites, reviling Agamemnon shepherd of the host. But goodly
Odysseus came straight to his side, and looking sternly at him with
hard words rebuked him: “Thersites, reckless in words, shrill orator
though thou art, refrain thyself, nor aim to strive singly against
kings. For I deem that no mortal is baser than thou of all that with
the sons of Atreus came before Ilios. Therefore were it well that thou
shouldest not have kings in thy mouth as thou talkest, and utter
revilings against them and be on the watch for departure. We know not
yet clearly how these things shall be, whether we sons of the Achaians
shall return for good or for ill. Therefore now dost thou revile
continually Agamemnon son of Atreus, shepherd of the host, because the
Danaan warriors give him many gifts, and so thou talkest tauntingly.
But I will tell thee plain, and that I say shall even be brought to
pass: if I find thee again raving as now thou art, then may Odysseus’
head no longer abide upon his shoulders, nor may I any more be called
father of Telemachos, if I take thee not and strip from thee thy
garments, thy mantle and tunic that cover thy nakedness, and for
thyself send thee weeping to the fleet ships, and beat thee out of the
assembly with shameful blows.”

So spake he, and with his staff smote his back and shoulders: and he
bowed down and a big tear fell from him, and a bloody weal stood up
from his back beneath the golden sceptre. Then he sat down and was
amazed, and in pain with helpless look wiped away the tear. But the
rest, though they were sotty, laughed lightly at him, and thus would
one speak looking at another standing by: “Go to, of a truth Odysseus
hath wrought good deeds without number ere now, standing foremost in
wise counsels and setting battle in array, but now is this thing the
best by far that he hath wrought among the Argives, to wit, that he
hath stayed this prating railer from his harangues. Never again,
forsooth, will his proud soul henceforth bid him revile the kings with
slanderous words.”

So said the common sort; but up rose Odysseus waster of cities, with
sceptre in his hand. And by his side bright-eyed Athene in the likeness
of a herald bade the multitude keep silence, that the sons of the
Achaians, both the nearest and the farthest, might hear his words
together and give heed to his counsel. He of good intent made harangue
to them and said: “Atreides, now surely are the Achaians for making
thee, O king, most despised among all mortal men, nor will they fulfil
the promise that they pledged thee when they still were marching hither
from horse-pasturing Argos; that thou shouldest not return till thou
hadst laid well-walled Ilios waste. For like young children or widow
women do they wail each to the other of returning home. Yea, here is
toil to make a man depart disheartened. For he that stayeth away but
one single month far from his wife in his benched ship fretteth himself
when winter storms and the furious sea imprison him; but for us, the
ninth year of our stay here is upon us in its course. Therefore do I
not marvel that the Achaians should fret beside their beaked ships; yet
nevertheless is it shameful to wait long and to depart empty. Be of
good heart, my friends, and wait a while, until we learn whether
Kalchas be a true prophet or no. For this thing verily we know well in
our hearts, and ye all are witnesses thereof, even as many as the fates
of death have not borne away. It was as it were but yesterday or the
day before that the Achaians’ ships were gathering in Aulis, freighted
with trouble for Priam and the Trojans; and we round about a spring
were offering on the holy altars unblemished hecatombs to the
immortals, beneath a fair plane-tree whence flowed bright water, when
there was seen a great portent: a snake blood-red on the back,
terrible, whom the god of Olympus himself had sent forth to the light
of day, sprang from beneath the altar and darted to the plane-tree. Now
there were there the brood of a sparrow, tender little ones, upon the
topmost branch, nestling beneath the leaves; eight were they and the
mother of the little ones was the ninth, and the snake swallowed these
cheeping pitifully. And the mother fluttered around wailing for her
dear little ones; but he coiled himself and caught her by the wing as
she screamed about him. Now when he had swallowed the sparrow’s little
ones and the mother with them, the god who revealed him made of him a
sign; for the son of crooked-counselling Kronos turned him to stone,
and we stood by and marvelled to see what was done. So when the dread
portent brake in upon the hecatombs of the gods, then did Kalchas
forthwith prophesy, and said: ‘Why hold ye your peace, ye
flowing-haired Achaians? To us hath Zeus the counsellor shown this
great sign, late come, of late fulfilment, the fame whereof shall never
perish. Even as he swallowed the sparrow’s little ones and herself, the
eight wherewith the mother that bare the little ones was the ninth, so
shall we war there so many years, but in the tenth year shall we take
the wide-wayed city.’ So spake the seer; and now are all these things
being fulfilled. So come, abide ye all, ye well-greaved Achaians, even
where ye are, until we have taken the great city of Priam.”

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, and all round the ships
echoed terribly to the voice of the Achaians as they praised the saying
of god-like Odysseus. And then spake among them knightly Nestor of
Gerenia: “Out on it; in very truth ye hold assembly like silly boys
that have no care for deeds of war. What shall come of our covenants
and our oaths? Let all counsels be cast into the fire and all devices
of warriors and the pure drink-offerings and the right hands of
fellowship wherein we trusted. For we are vainly striving with words
nor can we find any device at all, for all our long tarrying here. Son
of Atreus, do thou still, as erst, keep steadfast purpose and lead the
Argives amid the violent fray; and for these, let them perish, the one
or two Achaians that take secret counsel—though fulfilment shall not
come thereof—to depart to Argos first, before they know whether the
promise of aegis-bearing Zeus be a lie or no. Yea, for I say that most
mighty Kronion pledged us his word that day when the Argives embarked
upon their fleet ships, bearing unto the Trojans death and fate; for by
his lightning upon our right he manifested signs of good. Therefore let
Trojan’s wife and paid back his strivings and groans for Helen’s sake.
But if any man is overmuch desirous to depart homewards, let him lay
his hand upon his decked black ship, that before all men he may
encounter death and fate. But do thou, my king, take good counsel
thyself, and hearken to another that shall give it; the word that I
speak, whate’er it be, shall not be cast away. Separate thy warriors by
tribes and by clans, Agamemnon, that clan may give aid to clan and
tribe to tribe. If thou do thus and the Achaians hearken to thee, then
wilt thou know who among thy captains and who of the common sort is a
coward, and who too is brave; for they will fight each after their
sort. So wilt thou know whether it is even by divine command that thou
shalt not take the city, or by the baseness of thy warriors and their
ill skill in battle.”

And lord Agamemnon answered and said to him: “Verily hast thou again
outdone the sons of the Achaians in speech, old man. Ah, father Zeus
and Athene and Apollo, would that among the Achaians I had ten such
councillors; then would the city of king Priam soon bow beneath our
hands, captive and wasted. But aegis-bearing Zeus, the son of Kronos,
hath brought sorrows upon me, in that he casteth my lot amid fruitless
wranglings and strifes. For in truth I and Achilles fought about a
damsel with violent words, and I was first to be angry; but if we can
only be at one in council, then will there no more be any putting off
the day of evil for the Trojans, no not for an instant. But now go ye
to your meal that we may join battle. Let each man sharpen well his
spear and bestow well his shield, and let him well give his
fleet-footed steeds their meal, and look well to his chariot on every
side and take thought for battle, that all day long we may contend in
hateful war. For of respite shall there intervene no, not a whit, only
that the coming of night shall part the fury of warriors. On each man’s
breast shall the baldrick of his covering shield be wet with sweat, and
his hand shall grow faint about the spear, and each man’s horse shall
sweat as he draweth the polished chariot. And whomsoever I perceive
minded to tarry far from the fight beside the beaked ships, for him
shall there be no hope hereafter to escape the dogs and birds of prey.”

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, like to a wave on a steep
shore, when the south wind cometh and stirreth it; even on a jutting
rock, that is never left at peace by the waves of all winds that rise
from this side and from that. And they stood up and scattered in haste
throughout the ships, and made fires in the huts and took their meal.
And they did sacrifice each man to one of the everlasting gods, praying
for escape from death and the tumult of battle. But Agamemnon king of
men slew a fat bull of five years to most mighty Kronion, and called
the elders, the princes of the Achaian host, Nestor first and king
Idomeneus, and then the two Aiantes and Tydeus’ son, and sixthly
Odysseus peer of Zeus in counsel. And Menelaos of the loud war-cry came
to him unbidden, for he knew in his heart how his brother toiled. Then
stood they around the bull and took the barley-meal. And Agamemnon made
his prayer in their midst and said: “Zeus, most glorious, most great,
god of the storm-cloud, that dwellest in the heaven, vouchsafe that the
sun set not upon us nor the darkness come near, till I have laid low
upon the earth Priam’s palace smirched with smoke, and burnt the
doorways thereof with consuming fire, and rent on Hector’s breast his
doublet cleft with the blade; and about him may full many of his
comrades prone in the dust bite the earth.”

So spake he, but not as yet would Kronion grant him fulfilment; he
accepted the sacrifice, but made toil to wax increasingly.

Now when they had prayed and sprinkled the barley-meal they first drew
back the bull’s head and cut his throat and flayed him, and cut slices
from the thighs and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid
raw collops thereon. And these they burnt on cleft wood stript of
leaves, and spitted the vitals and held them over Hephaistos’ flame.
Now when the thighs were burnt and they had tasted the vitals, then
sliced they all the rest and pierced it through with spits, and roasted
it carefully and drew all off again. So when they had rest from the
task and had made ready the banquet, they feasted, nor was their heart
aught stinted of the fair banquet. But when they had put away from them
the desire of meat and drink, then did knightly Nestor of Gerenia open
his saying to them: “Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of men,
let us not any more hold long converse here, nor for long delay the
work that god putteth in our hands; but come, let the heralds of the
mail-clad Achaians make proclamation to the folk and gather them
throughout the ships; and let us go thus in concert through the wide
host of the Achaians, that the speedier we may arouse keen war.”

So spake he and Agamemnon king of men disregarded not. Straightway he
bade the clear-voiced heralds summon to battle the flowing-haired
Achaians. So those summoned and these gathered with all speed. And the
kings, the fosterlings of Zeus that were about Atreus’ son, eagerly
marshalled them, and bright-eyed Athene in the midst, bearing the holy
aegis that knoweth neither age nor death, whereon wave an hundred
tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven and each one an hundred oxen
worth. Therewith she passed dazzling through the Achaian folk, urging
them forth; and in every man’s heart she roused strength to battle
without ceasing and to fight. So was war made sweeter to them than to
depart in their hollow ships to their dear native land. Even as
ravaging fire kindleth a boundless forest on a mountain’s peaks, and
the blaze is seen from afar, even so as they marched went the dazzling
gleam from the innumerable bronze through the sky even unto the
heavens.

And as the many tribes of feathered birds, wild geese or cranes or
long-necked swans, on the Asian mead by Kaystrios’ stream, fly hither
and thither joying in their plumage, and with loud cries settle ever
onwards, and the mead resounds; even so poured forth the many tribes of
warriors from ships and huts into the Skamandrian plain. And the earth
echoed terribly beneath the tread of men and horses. So stood they in
the flowery Skamandrian plain, unnumbered as are leaves and flowers in
their season. Even as the many tribes of thick flies that hover about a
herdsman’s steading in the spring season, when milk drencheth the
pails, even in like number stood the flowing-haired Achaians upon the
plain in face of the Trojans, eager to rend them asunder. And even as
the goatherds easily divide the ranging flocks of goats when they
mingle in the pasture, so did their captains marshal them on this side
and that, to enter into the fray, and in their midst lord Agamemnon,
his head and eyes like unto Zeus whose joy is in the thunder, and his
waist like unto Ares and his breast unto Poseidon. Even as a bull
standeth out far foremost amid the herd, for he is pre-eminent amid the
pasturing kine, even such did Zeus make Atreides on that day,
pre-eminent among many and chief amid heroes.

Tell me now, ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus—seeing that
ye are goddesses and are at hand and know all things, but we hear only
a rumour and know not anything—who were the captains of the Danaans and
their lords. But the common sort could I not number nor name, nay, not
if ten tongues were mine and ten mouths, and a voice unwearied, and my
heart of bronze within me, did not the Muses of Olympus, daughters of
aegis-bearing Zeus, put into my mind all that came to Ilios. So will I
tell the captains of the ships and all the ships in order.

Of the Boiotians Peneleos and Leitos were captains, and Arkesilaos and
Prothoënor and Klonios; these were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky
Aulis and Schoinos and Skolos and Eteonos full of ridges, Thespeia and
Graia and Mykalessos with wide lawns; and that dwelt about Harma and
Eilesion and Erythrai, and they that possessed Eleon and Peteon and
Hyle, Okalea and the stablished fortress of Medeon, Kopai and Eutresis
and Thisbe haunt of doves; and they of Koroneia and grassy Haliartos,
and that possessed Plataia and that dwelt in Glisas, and that possessed
the stablished fortress of lesser Thebes and holy Onchestos, Poseidon’s
bright grove; and that possessed Arne rich in vineyards, and Mideia and
sacred Nisa and Anthedon on the furthest borders. Of these there came
fifty ships, and in each one embarked young men of the Boiotians an
hundred and twenty. And they that dwelt in Aspledon and Orchomenos of
the Minyai were led of Askalaphos and Ialmenos, sons of Ares, whom
Astyoche conceived of the mighty god in the palace of Aktor son of
Azeus, having entered her upper chamber, a stately maiden; for mighty
Ares lay with her privily. And with them sailed thirty hollow ships.

And the Phokians were led of Schedios and Epistrophos, sons of
great-hearted Iphitos son of Naubolos; these were they that possessed
Kyparissos and rocky Pytho and sacred Krisa and Daulis and Panopeus,
and they that dwelt about Anemoreia and Hyampolis, yea, and they that
lived by the goodly river Kephisos and possessed Lilaia by Kephisos’
springs. And with them followed forty black ships. So they marshalled
the ranks of the Phokians diligently, and had their station hard by the
Boiotians on the left.

And of the Lokrians the fleet son of Oileus was captain, Aias the less,
that was not so great as was the Telamonian Aias but far less. Small
was he, with linen corslet, but with the spear he far outdid all the
Hellenes and Achaians. These were they that dwelt in Kynos and Opus and
Kalliaros and Bessa and Skarphe and lovely Augeiai and Tarphe and
Thronion, about the streams of Boagrios. And with Aias followed forty
black ships of the Lokrians that dwell over against holy Euboia.

And the Abantes breathing fury, they that possessed Euboia and Chalkis
and Eiretria and Histiaia rich in vines, and Kerinthos by the sea and
the steep fortress of Dios, and they that possessed Karytos, and they
that dwelt in Styra, all these again were led of Elephenor of the stock
of Ares, even the son of Chalkodon, and captain of the proud Abantes.
And with him followed the fleet Abantes with hair flowing behind,
spearmen eager with ashen shafts outstretched to tear the corslets on
the breasts of the foes. And with him forty black ships followed.

And they that possessed the goodly citadel of Athens, the domain of
Erechtheus the high-hearted, whom erst Athene daughter of Zeus fostered
when Earth, the grain-giver, brought him to birth;—and she gave him a
resting-place in Athens in her own rich sanctuary; and there the sons
of the Athenians worship him with bulls and rams as the years turn in
their courses—these again were led of Menestheus son of Peteos. And
there was no man upon the face of earth that was like him for the
marshalling of horsemen and warriors that bear the shield. Only Nestor
rivalled him, for he was the elder by birth. And with him rivalled him,
for he was the elder by birth. And with him fifty black ships followed.

And Aias led twelve ships from Salamis, [and brought them and set them
where the battalions of the Athenians stood.]

And they that possessed Argos and Tiryns of the great walls, Hermione
and Asine that enfold the deep gulf, Troizen and Eïonai and Epidauros
full of vines, and the youths of the Achaians that possessed Aigina and
Mases, these were led of Diomedes of the loud war-cry and Sthenelos,
dear son of famous Kapaneus. And the third with them came Euryalos, a
godlike warrior, the son of king Mekisteus son of Talaos. But Diomedes
of the loud war-cry was lord over all. And with them eighty black ships
followed.

And of them that possessed the stablished fortress of Mykene and
wealthy Corinth and stablished Kleonai, and dwelt in Orneiai and lovely
Araithyrea and Sikyon, wherein Adrestos was king at the first; and of
them that possessed Hyperesie and steep Gonoessa and Pellene, and dwelt
about Aigion and through all the coast-land and about broad Helike, of
them did lord Agamemnon son of Atreus lead an hundred ships. With him
followed most and goodliest folk by far; and in their midst himself was
clad in flashing bronze, all glorious, and was pre-eminent amid all
warriors, because he was goodliest and led folk far greatest in number.

And of them that possessed Lakedaimon lying low amid the rifted hills,
and Pharis and Sparta and Messe, the haunt of doves, and dwelt in
Bryseiai and lovely Augeiai, and of them too that possessed Amyklai and
the sea-coast fortress of Helos, and that possessed Laas and dwelt
about Oitylos, of these was the king’s brother leader, even Menelaos of
the loud war-cry, leader of sixty ships, and these were arrayed apart.
And himself marched among them confident in his zeal, urging his men to
battle: and his heart most of all was set to take vengeance for his
strivings and groans for Helen’s sake.*

* Or, “for Helen’s searchings of heart and groans.”


And of them that dwelt in Pylos and lovely Arene and Thryon the
fording-place of Alpheios, and in established Aipy, and were
inhabitants of Kyparisseis and Amphigeneia and Pteleos and Helos and
Dorion—where the Muses met Thamyris the Thracian, and made an end of
his singing, as he was faring from Oichalia, from Eurytos the
Oichalian; for he averred with boasting that he would conquer, even did
the Muses themselves sing against him, the daughters of aegis-bearing
Zeus; but they in their anger maimed him, moreover they took from him
the high gift of song and made him to forget his harping—of all these
was knightly Nestor of Gerenia leader, and with him sailed ninety
hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Arkadia beneath the steep mountain of
Kyllene, beside the tomb of Aipytos, where are warriors that fight hand
to hand; and of them that dwelt in Pheneos and Orchomenos abounding in
flocks, and Rhipe and Stratie and windy Enispe, and that possessed
Tegea and lovely Mantineia, and possessed Stymphelos and dwelt in
Parrhasie, of these was Ankaios’ son lord Agapenor leader, even of
sixty ships; and in each ship embarked many Arkadian warriors skilled
in fight. For Agamemnon king of men himself gave them benched ships
wherewith to cross the wine-dark sea, even he the son of Atreus; for
matters of seafaring concerned them not.

And they too that inhabited Bouprasion and goodly Elis, so much thereof
as Hyrmine and Myrsinos upon the borders and the Olenian rock and
Aleision bound between them, of these men there were four captains, and
ten swift ships followed each one, and many Epeians embarked thereon.
So some were led of Amphimachos and Thalpios, of the lineage of Aktor,
sons one of Kteatos and one of Eurytos; and of some was stalwart Diores
captain, son of Amarynkes; and of the fourth company godlike Polyxeinos
was captain, son of king Agasthenes Augeias’ son.

And them of Doulichion and the holy Echinean Isles that stand beyond
the sea over against Elis, even these did Meges lead, the peer of Ares,
Phyleides to wit, for he was begotten of knightly Phyleus dear to Zeus,
him that erst changed his habitation to Doulichion for anger against
his father. And with him followed forty black ships.

And Odysseus led the great-hearted Kephallenians, them that possessed
Ithaka and Neriton with quivering leafage, and dwelt in Krokyleia and
rugged Aigilips, and them that possessed Zakynthos and that dwelt in
Samos, and possessed the mainland and dwelt in the parts over against
the isles. Them did Odysseus lead, the peer of Zeus in counsel, and
with him followed twelve ships with vermillion prow.

And of the Aitolians Thoas was captain, the son of Andraimon, even of
them that dwelt in Pleuron and Olenos and Pylene, and Chalkis on the
sea-shore and rocky Kalydon. For the sons of great-hearted Oineus were
no more, neither did he still live, and golden-haired Meleagros was
dead, to whose hands all had been committed, for him to be king of the
Aitolians. And with Thoas there followed forty black ships.

And of the Cretans Idomeneus the famous spearman was leader, even of
them that possessed Knosos and Gortys of the great walls, Lyktos and
Miletos and chalky Lykastos and Phaistos and Rhytion, stablished cities
all; and of all others that dwelt in Crete of the hundred cities. Of
these men was Idomeneus the famous spearman leader, and Meriones peer
of the man-slaying war-god. With these followed eighty black ships.

And Tlepolemmos, Herakles’ son goodly and tall, led from Rhodes nine
ships of the lordly Rhodians, that dwelt in Rhodes in threefold
ordering, in Lindos and Ialysos and chalky Kameiros. These were led of
Tlepolemos the famous spearman, that was born to great Herakles by
Astyocheia, whom he had brought away from Ephyre by the river Selleëis,
when he laid waste many cities of strong men, fosterlings of Zeus. Now
when Tlepolemos had grown to manhood within the strong palace walls,
anon he slew his own father’s dear uncle, an old man now, Likymnios of
the stock of Ares. Then with speed built he ships and gathered much
folk together, and went fleeing across the deep, because the other sons
and grandsons of great Herakles threatened him. So he came to Rhodes a
wanderer, enduring hardships, and his folk settled by kinship in three
tribes, and were loved of Zeus that is king among gods and men; and
Kronion poured upon them exceeding great wealth.

Nireus, moreover, led three trim ships from Syme, Nireus son of Aglaia
and king Charopos, Nireus the most beauteous man that came up under
Ilios of all the Danaans, after the noble son of Peleus. Howbeit he was
a weakling, and a scanty host followed him.

And of them that possessed Nisyros and Krapathos and Kasos and Kos the
city of Eurypylos, and the Kalydnian Isles, of them Pheidippos and
Antiphos were leaders, the two sons of king Thessalos son of Herakles.
With them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

Now all moreover that dwelt in the Pelasgian Argos and inhabited Alos
and Alope and Trachis and possessed Phthia and Hellas the home of fair
women, and were called Myrmidons and Hellenes and Achaians; of all
these, even fifty ships, Achilles was captain. But these took no
thought of noisy war; for there was no man to array them in line of
battle. For fleet-footed goodly Achilles lay idle amid the ships, wroth
for the sake of a damsel, Briseis of the lovely hair, whom he had won
from Lyrnessos with much travail, what time he laid waste Lyrnessos and
the walls of Thebe, and overthrew Mynes and Epistrophos, warriors that
bare the spear, sons of king Euenos Selepos’ son. For her sake lay
Achilles sorrowing; but soon was he to arise again.

And of them that possessed Phylake and flowery Pyrasos, Demeter’s
sanctuary, and Iton mother of flocks, and Antron by the sea-shore and
Pteleos couched in grass, of all these was warlike Protesilaos leader
while yet he lived; but now ere this the black earth held him fast. His
wife with marred visage was left alone in Phylake, yea, and his bridal
chamber half builded; for a Dardanian warrior slew him as he leapt from
his ship far first of the Achaians. Yet neither were his men
leaderless, though they sorrowed for their leader; for Podarkes of the
stock of Ares marshalled them, son of Phylakos’ son Iphiklos was he,
the lord of many flocks, own brother of great-hearted Protesilaos, and
younger-born than he: but the other was alike the elder and the braver,
even Protesilaos, that mighty man of war. Yet did not the host lack at
all a leader, only they yearned for the noble dead. With him followed
forty black ships.

And of them that dwelt in Pherai by the Boibeian mere, in Boibe and
Glaphyre and stablished Iolkos, of them, even eleven ships, Admetos’
dear son was leader, Eumelos whom Alkestis, fair among women, bare to
Admetos, she that was most beauteous to look upon of the daughters of
Pelias.

And of them that dwelt in Methone and Thaumakie, and possessed Meliboia
and rugged Olizon, of these, even seven ships, was Philoktetes leader,
the cunning archer; and in each ship sailed fifty oarsmen skilled to
fight amain with the bow. But their captain lay enduring sore pain in
the isle of goodly Lemnos, where the sons of the Achaians left him sick
of a grievous wound from a deadly water-snake. There lay he pining; yet
were the Argives soon to bethink them beside their ships of king
Philoktetes. Yet neither were his men leaderless, only they sorrowed
for their leader; but Medon marshalled them, Oileus’ bastard son, whom
Rhene bare to Oileus waster of cities.

And of them that possessed Trikke and terraced Ithome and that
possessed Oichalia city of Eurytos the Oichalian, of these again
Asklepios’ two sons were leaders, the cunning leeches Podaleirios and
Machaon. And with them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Ormenios and the fountain of Hypereia, and
possessed Asterion and the white crests of Titanos, of these was
Eurypylos leader, Euaimon’s glorious son; and with him forty black
ships followed.

And of them that possessed Argissa and dwelt in Gyrtona, Orthe and
Elone and the white city of Oloosson, of these was captain unflinching
Polypoites, son of Peirithoos that immortal Zeus begat: and Polypoites
did famed Hippodameia conceive of Peirithoos on that day when he took
vengeance of the shaggy wild folk, and thrust them forth from Pelion
and drave them to the Aithikes. And Polypoites ruled not alone, but
with him was Leonteus of the stock of Ares, son of high-hearted Koronos
Kaineus’s son. And with them forty black ships followed.

And Gouneus from Kyphos led two-and-twenty ships, and with him followed
the Enienes and unflinching Peraibians that had pitched their homes
about wintry Dodona, and dwelt on the tilth about lovely Titaresios
that poureth his fair-flowing stream into Peneios. Yet doth he not
mingle with the silver eddies of Peneios, but floweth on over him like
unto oil, seeing that he is an offspring from the water of Styx, the
dread river of the oath.

And the Magnetes were led of Prothoos son of Tenthredon, even they that
dwelt about Peneios and Pelion with trembling leafage. These did fleet
Prothoos lead, and with him forty black ships followed.

So these were the leaders of the Danaans and their captains. Now tell
me, O Muse, who among them was first and foremost, of warriors alike
and horses that followed the sons of Atreus. Of horses they of Pheres’
son were far goodliest, those that Eumelos drave, swift as birds, like
of coat, like of age, matched to the measure of a levelling line across
their backs. These were reared in Peraia by Apollo of the silver bow,
two mares carrying onward the terror of battle. But of warriors far
best was the Telamonian Aias, while the wrath of Achilles yet endured;
for he was greatest of all, he and his horses that bore him, even
Peleus’ noble son. But he lay idle among his seafaring ships, in sore
wrath against Agamemnon Atreus’ son, shepherd of the host; and his folk
along the sea-shore sported with quoits and with casting of javelins
and archery; and the horses each beside his own chariot stood idle,
champing clover and parsley of the marsh, and their lords’ chariots lay
well covered up within the huts, while the men yearned for their
warrior chief, and wandered hither and thither through the camp and
fought not.

So marched they then as though all the land were consuming with fire;
and the earth groaned beneath them as at the wrath of Zeus whose joy is
in the thunder, when he lasheth the earth about Typhoeus in the country
of the Arimoi, where men say is Typhoeus’ couch. Even so groaned the
earth aloud at their tread as they went: and with speed advanced they
across the plain.

Now fleet Iris the wind-footed went to the Trojans, a messenger from
aegis-bearing Zeus, with a grievous message. These were holding
assembly at Priam’s gate, being gathered all together both young men
and old. And fleet-footed Iris stood hard by and spake to them; and she
made her voice like to the voice of Polites son of Priam, who was the
sentinel of the Trojans and was wont to sit trusting in his fleetness
upon the barrow of Aisyetes of old, and on the top thereof wait the
sallying of the Achaians forth from their ships. Even in his likeness
did fleet-footed Iris speak to Priam: “Old man, words beyond number are
still pleasant to thee as erst in the days of peace; but war without
respite is upon us. Of a truth have I very oft ere now entered into
battles of the warriors, yet have I never seen so goodly a host and so
great; for in the very likeness of the leaves of the forest or the
sands of the sea are they marching along the plain to fight against the
city. But Hector, thee do I charge beyond all to do even as I shall
say. Seeing that the allies are very many throughout Priam’s great
city, and diverse men, being scattered abroad, have diverse tongues;
therefore let each one give the word to those whose chieftain he is,
and them let him lead forth and have the ordering of his countrymen.”

So spake she, and Hector failed not to know the voice of the goddess,
and straightway dismissed the assembly, and they rushed to arms. And
the gates were thrown open wide, and the host issued forth, footmen and
horsemen, and mighty din arose.

Now there is before the city a certain steep mound apart in the plain,
with a clear way about it on this side and on that; and men indeed call
this “Batieia,” but the immortals call it “The tomb of lithe Myrine.”
There did the Trojans and their allies divide their companies.

Amid the Trojans great Hector of the glancing helm was leader, the son
of Priam; with him the greatest hosts by far and the goodliest were
arrayed, eager warriors of the spear.

But the Dardanians were led of the princely son of Anchises, Aineias,
whom bright Aphrodite conceived to Anchises amids the spurs of Ida, a
goddess wedded to a mortal. Neither was he alone; with him were
Antenor’s two sons, Archelochos and Akamas, well skilled in all the
ways of war.

And of them that dwelt in Zeleia beneath the nethermost foot of Ida,
the men of substance that drink the dark waters of Aisepos, even the
Troes; of these Lykaon’s glorious son was leader, Pandaros, to whom
Apollo himself gave the bow.

And of them that possessed Adresteia and the land of Apaisos and
possessed Pityeia and the steep hill of Tereia, of these Adrestos was
captain, and Amphios of the linen corslet, the two sons of Merops of
Perkote, that beyond all men knew soothsaying, and would have hindered
his children marching to murderous war. But they gave him no heed, for
the fates of black death led them on.

And they that dwelt about Perkote and Praktios and possessed Sestos and
Abydos and bright Arisbe, these were led of Hyrtakos’ son Asios, a
prince of men, Asios son of Hyrtakos, whom his tall sorrel steeds
brought from Arisbe, from the river Selleëis.

And Hippothoos led the tribes of the Pelasgians that fight with spears,
them that inhabited deep-soiled Larisa. These were led of Hippothoos
and Pylaios of the stock of Ares, twain sons of Pelasgian Lethos son of
Teutamos.

And the Thracians were led of Akamas and hero Peiroos, even all they
that the strong stream of Hellespont shutteth in. And Euphemos was
captain of the Kikonian spearmen, the son of Troizenos Keos’ son,
fosterling of Zeus.

But Pyraichmes led the Paionians with curving bows, from far away in
Amydon, from the broad stream of Axios, Axios whose water is the
fairest that floweth over the face of the earth.

And Pylaimenes of rugged heart led the Paphlagonians from the land of
the Eneti, whence is the breed of wild mules. This folk were they that
possessed Kytoros and dwelt about Sesamon, and inhabited their famed
dwellings round the river Parthenios and Kromna and Aigialos and lofty
Erythini.

And the Alizones were led of Odios and Epistrophos, from far away in
Alybe, where is the birthplace of silver.

And the Mysians were led of Chromis and Ennomos the augur, yet with all
his auguries warded he not black fate from him, but was vanguished by
the hand of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, when he made havoc of
the Trojans there and of the rest.

And Phorkys and godlike Askanios led the Phrygians from far Askania,
and these were eager to fight in the battle-throng.

And the Maionians were commanded of Mesthles and Antiphos, Talaimenes’
two sons, whose mother was the Gygaian mere. So these led the
Maionians, whose birthplace was under Tmolos.

But Nastes led the Karians, uncouth of speech, that possessed Miletos
and the mountain of Phthires, of leafage numberless, and the streams of
Maiandros and the steep crest of Mykale. These were led of Amphimachos
and Nastes: Nastes and Amphimachos the glorious children of Nomion. And
he came, forsooth, to battle with golden attire like a girl—fond man:
that held not back in any wise grievous destruction, but he was
vanguished by the hands of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, and
wise-hearted Achilles carried away his gold.

And Sarpedon and blameless Glaukos led the Lykians from far away in
Lykia by eddying Xanthos.




BOOK III.


How Menelaos and Paris fought in single combat; and Aphrodite rescued
Paris. And how Helen and Priam beheld the Achaian host from the walls
of Troy.


Now when they were arrayed, each company with their captains, the
Trojans marched with clamour and with shouting like unto birds, even as
when there goeth up before heaven a clamour of cranes which flee from
the coming of winter and sudden rain, and fly with clamour towards the
streams of ocean, bearing slaughter and fate to the Pigmy men, and in
early morn offer cruel battle. But on the other side marched the
Achaians in silence breathing courage, eager at heart to give succour
man to man.

Even as when the south wind sheddeth mist over the crests of a
mountain, mist unwelcome to the shepherd, but to the robber better than
night, and a man can see no further than he casteth a stone; even so
thick arose the gathering dust-clouds at their tread as they went; and
with all speed they advanced across the plain.

So when they were now come nigh in onset on each other, godlike
Alexandros played champion to the Trojans, wearing upon his shoulders
panther-skin and curved bow and sword; and he brandished two
bronze-headed spears and challenged all the chieftains of the Argives
to fight him man to man in deadly combat. But when Menelaos dear to
Ares marked him coming in the forefront of the multitude with long
strides, then even as a lion is glad when he lighteth upon a great
carcase, a horned stag, or a wild goat that he hath found, being an
hungered; and so he devoureth it amain, even though the fleet hounds
and lusty youths set upon him; even thus was Menelaos glad when his
eyes beheld godlike Alexandros; for he thought to take vengeance upon
the sinner. So straightway he leapt in his armour from his chariot to
the ground.

But when godlike Alexandros marked him appear amid the champions, his
heart was smitten, and he shrank back into the host of his comrades,
avoiding death. And even as a man that hath seen a serpent in a
mountain glade starteth backward and trembling seizeth his feet beneath
him, and he retreateth back again, and paleness hath hold of his
cheeks, even so did godlike Alexandros for fear of Atreus’ son shrink
back into the throng of lordly Trojans. But Hector beheld and upbraided
him with scornful words: “Ill Paris, most fair in semblance, thou
deceiver woman-mad, would thou hadst been unborn and died unwed. Yea,
that were my desire, and it were far better than thus to be our shame
and looked at askance of all men. I ween that the flowing-haired
Achaians laugh, deeming that a prince is our champion only because a
goodly favour is his; but in his heart is there no strength nor any
courage. Art thou indeed such an one that in thy seafaring ships thou
didst sail over the deep with the company of thy trusty comrades, and
in converse with strangers didst bring back a fair woman from a far
country, one that was by marriage daughter to warriors that bear the
spear, that she might be a sore mischief to thy father and city and all
the realm, but to our foes a rejoicing, and to thyself a hanging of the
head? And canst thou not indeed abide Menelaos dear to Ares? Thou
mightest see what sort of warrior is he whose lovely wife thou hast.
Thy lyre will not avail thee nor the gifts of Aphrodite, those thy
locks and fair favour, when thou grovellest in the dust. But the
Trojans are very cowards: else ere this hadst thou donned a robe of
stone* for all the ill thou hast wrought.”

* _i.e_., been stoned by the people.


And godlike Alexandros made answer to him again: “Hector, since in
measure thou chidest me and not beyond measure—thy heart is ever keen,
even as an axe that pierceth a beam at the hand of a man that shapeth a
ship’s timber with skill, and thereby is the man’s blow strengthened;
even such is thy heart undaunted in thy breast. Cast not in my teeth
the lovely gifts of golden Aphrodite; not to be flung aside are the
gods’ glorious gifts that of their own good will they give; for by his
desire can no man win them. But now if thou wilt have me do battle and
fight, make the other Trojans sit down and all the Achaians, and set ye
me in the midst, and Menelaos dear to Ares, to fight for Helen and all
her wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let
him take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home. And
let the rest pledge friendship and sure oaths; so may ye dwell in
deep-soiled Troy, and let them depart to Argos pasture-land of horses,
and Achaia home of fair women.”

So spake he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his saying, and went
into the midst and restrained the battalions of the Trojans, with his
spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down. But the
flowing-haired Achaians kept shooting at him, aiming with arrows and
casting stones. But Agamemnon king of men cried aloud: “Refrain, ye
Argives; shoot not, ye sons of the Achaians; for Hector of the glancing
helm hath set himself to say somewhat.”

So spake he, and they refrained from battle and made silence speedily.
And Hector spake between the two hosts, “Hear of me, Trojans and
well-greaved Achaians, the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife
hath come about. He biddeth the other Trojans and all the Achaians to
lay down their goodly armour on the bounteous earth, and himself in the
midst and Menelaos dear to Ares to fight alone for Helen and all her
wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let him
take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home; but let
all of us pledge friendship and sure oaths.”

So spake he, and they all kept silence and were still. Then in their
midst spake Menelaos of the loud war-cry: “Hearken ye now to me, too;
for into my heart most of all is grief entered; and I deem that the
parting of Argives and Trojans hath come at last; seeing ye have
endured many ills because of my quarrel and the first sin of
Alexandros. And for whichsoever of us death and fate are prepared, let
him lie dead: and be ye all parted with speed. Bring ye two lambs, one
white ram and one black ewe, for earth and sun; and let us bring one
for Zeus. And call hither great Priam, that he may pledge the oath
himself, seeing he hath sons that are overweening and faithless, lest
any by transgression do violence to the oath of Zeus; for young men’s
hearts are ever lifted up. But wheresoever an old man entereth in, he
looketh both before and after, whereby the best issue shall come for
either side.”

So spake he, and Achaians and Trojans were glad, deeming that they
should have rest from grievous war. So they refrained their chariots to
the ranks, and themselves alighted and doffed their arms. And these
they laid upon the earth each close to each, and there was but small
space between. And Hector sent two heralds to the city will all speed,
to bring the lambs, and to call Priam. And lord Agamemnon sent forth
Talthybios to go to the hollow ships, and bade him bring a ram; and he
was not disobedient to noble Agamemnon.

Now Iris went with a message to white-armed Helen in the likeness of
her husband’s sister, the spouse of Antenor’s son, even her that lord
Helikaon Antenor’s son had to wife, Laodike fairest favoured of Priam’s
daughters. And in the hall she found Helen weaving a great purple web
of double fold, and embroidering thereon many battles of horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians, that they had endured for her sake at
the hands of Ares. So fleet-footed Iris stood by her side and said:
“Come hither, dear sister, that thou mayest see the wondrous doings of
horse-taming Trojans and mail-clad Achaians. They that erst waged
tearful war upon each other in the plain, eager for deadly battle, even
they sit now in silence, and the tall spears are planted by their
sides. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to Ares will fight with their
tall spears for thee; and thou wilt be declared the dear wife of him
that conquereth.”

So spake the goddess, and put into her heart sweet longing for her
former husband and her city and parents.

Forthwith she veiled her face in shining linen, and hastened from her
chamber, letting fall a round tear; not unattended, for there followed
with her two handmaidens, Aithre daughter of Pittheus and ox-eyed
Klymene. Then came she straightway to the place of the Skaian gates.
And they that were with Priam and Panthoos and Thymoites and Lampos and
Klytios and Hiketaon of the stock of Ares, Oukalegon withal and
Antenor, twain sages, being elders of the people, sat at the Skaian
gates. These had now ceased from battle for old age, yet were they
right good orators, like grasshoppers that in a forest sit upon a tree
and utter their lily-like* voice; even so sat the elders of the Trojans
upon the tower. Now when they saw Helen coming to the tower they softly
spake winged words one to the other: “Small blame is it that Trojans
and well-greaved Achaians should for such a woman long time suffer
hardships; marvellously like is she to the immortal goddesses to look
upon. Yet even so, though she be so goodly, let her go upon their ships
and not stay to vex us and our children after us.”

* Supposed to mean “delicate” or “tender”.


So said they, and Priam lifted up his voice and called to Helen: “Come
hither, dear child, and sit before me, that thou mayest see thy former
husband and they kinsfolk and thy friends. I hold thee not to blame;
nay, I hold the gods to blame who brought on me the dolorous war of the
Achaians—so mayest thou now tell me who is this huge hero, this Achaian
warrior so goodly and great. Of a truth there are others even taller by
a head; yet mine eyes never behold a man so beautiful nor so royal; for
he is like unto one that is a king.”

And Helen, fair among women, spake and answered him: “Reverend art thou
to me and dread, dear father of my lord; would that sore death had been
my pleasure when I followed thy son hither, and left my home and my
kinsfolk and my daughter in her girlhood and the lovely company of mine
age-fellows. But that was not so, wherefore I pine with weeping. Now
will I tell thee that whereof thou askest me and enquirest. This is
Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, one that is both a goodly king and
mighty spearman. And he was my husband’s brother to me, ah shameless
me; if ever such an one there was.”

So said she, and the old man marvelled at him, and said: “Ah, happy
Atreides, child of fortune, blest of heaven; now know I that many sons
of the Achaians are subject to thee. Erewhile fared I to Phrygia, the
land of vines, and there saw I that the men of Phrygia, they of the
nimble steeds, were very many, even the hosts of Otreus and godlike
Mygdon, that were then encamped along the banks of Sangarios. For I too
being their ally was numbered among them on the day that the Amazons
came, the peers of men. Yet were not even they so many as are the
glancing-eyed Achaians.”

And next the old man saw Odysseus, and asked: “Come now, tell me of
this man too, dear child, who is he, shorter by a head than Agamemnon
son of Atreus, but broader of shoulder and of chest to behold? His
armour lieth upon the bounteous earth, and himself like a bell-wether
rangeth the ranks of warriors. Yea, I liken him to a thick-fleeced ram
ordering a great flock of ewes.”

Then Helen sprung of Zeus made answer to him: “Now this is Laertes’
son, crafty Odysseus, that was reared in the realm of Ithaka, rugged
though it be, and skilled in all the ways of wile and cunning device.”

Then sage Antenor made answer to her: “Lady, verily the thing thou
sayest is true indeed, for erst came goodly Odysseus hither also on an
embassage for thee, in the company of Menelaos dear to Ares; and I gave
them entertainment and welcomed them in my halls, and learnt the aspect
of both and their wise devices. Now when they mingled with the Trojans
in the assembly, while all stood up Menelaos overpassed them all by the
measure of his broad shoulders; but when both sat down, Odysseus was
the more stately. And when they began to weave the web of words and
counsel in the face of all, then Menelaos harangued fluently, in few
words, but very clearly, seeing he was not long of speech, neither
random, though in years he was the younger. But whenever Odysseus full
of wiles rose up, he stood and looked down, with eyes fixed upon the
ground, and waved not his staff whether backwards or forwards, but held
it stiff, like to a man of no understanding; one would deem him to be
churlish, and naught but a fool. But when he uttered his great voice
from his chest, and words like unto the snowflakes of winter, then
could no mortal man contend with Odysseus; then marvelled we not thus
to behold Odysseus’ aspect.”

And thirdly the old man say Aias, and asked: “Who then is this other
Achaian warrior, goodly and great, preeminent among the Archives by the
measure of his head and broad shoulders?”

And long-robed Helen, fair among women, answered: “This is huge Aias,
bulwark of the Achaians. And on the other side amid the Cretans
standeth Idomeneus like a god, and about him are gathered the captains
of the Cretans. Oft did Menelaos dear to Ares entertain him in our
house whene’er he came from Crete. And now behold I all the other
glancing-eyed Achaians, whom well I could discern and tell their names;
but two captains of the host can I not see, even Kastor tamer of horses
and Polydeukes the skilful boxer, mine own brethren, whom the same
mother bare. Either they came not in the company from lovely
Lakedaimon; or they came hither indeed in their seafaring ships, but
now will not enter into the battle of the warriors, for fear of the
many scornings and revilings that are mine.”

So said she; but them the life-giving earth held fast there in
Lakedaimon, in their dear native land.

Meanwhile were the heralds bearing through the city the holy
oath-offerings, two lambs and strong-hearted wine, the fruit of the
earth, in a goat-skin bottle. And the herald Idaios bare the shining
bowl and golden cups; and came to the old man and summoned him and
said: “Rise, thou son of Laomedon. The chieftains of the horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians call on thee to go down into the plain,
that ye may pledge a trusty oath. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to
Ares will fight with their long spears for the lady’s sake; and let
lady and treasure go with him that shall conquer. And may we that are
left pledge friendship and trusty oaths and dwell in deep-soiled Troy,
and they shall depart to Argos pasture-land of horses and Achaia home
of fair women.”

So said he, and the old man shuddered and base his companions yoke the
horses; and they with speed obeyed. Then Priam mounted and drew back
the reins, and by his side Antenor mounted the splendid chariot. So the
two drave the fleet horses through the Skaian gates to the plain. And
when they had come even to the Trojans and Achaians, they went down
from the chariots upon the bounteous earth, and marched into the midst
of Trojans and Achaians. Then forthwith rose up Agamemnon king of men,
and up rose Odysseus the man of wiles; and the lordly heralds gathered
together the holy oath-offerings of the gods, and mingled the wine in a
bowl, and poured water over the princes’ hands. And Atreides put forth
his hand and drew his knife that hung ever beside his sword’s great
sheath, and cut the hair from off the lambs’ heads; and then the
heralds portioned it among the chief of the Trojans and Achaians. Then
in their midst Atreus’ son lifted up his hands and prayed aloud:
“Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, and thou
Sun that seest all things and hearest all things, and ye Rivers and
thou Earth, and ye that in the underworld punish men outworn, whosoever
sweareth falsely; be ye witnesses, and watch over the faithful oath. If
Alexandros slay Menelaos, then let him have Helen to himself and all
her possessions; and we will depart on our seafaring ships. But if
golden-haired Menelaos slay Alexandros, then let the Trojans give back
Helen and all her possessions and pay the Argives the recompense that
is seemly, such as shall live among men that shall be hereafter. But if
so be that Priam and Priam’s sons will not pay the recompense unto me
when Alexandros falleth, then will I fight on thereafter for the price
of sin, and abide here till I compass the end of war.”

So said he, and cut the lambs’ throats with the pitiless knife. Them he
laid gasping upon the ground, failing of breath, for the knife had
taken their strength from them; and next they drew the wine from the
bowl into the cups, and poured it forth and prayed to the gods that
live for ever. And thus would say many an one of Achaians and Trojans:
“Zeus most glorious, most great, and all ye immortal gods, which folk
soe’er be first to sin against the oaths, may their brains be so poured
forth upon the earth even as this wine, theirs and their children’s;
and let their wives be made subject unto strangers.”

So spake they, but the son of Kronos vouchsafed not yet fulfilment. And
in their midst Priam of the seed of Dardanos uttered his saying:
“Hearken to me, Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. I verily will return
back to windy Ilios, seeing that I can in no wise bear to behold with
mine eyes my dear son fighting with Menelaos dear to Ares. But Zeus
knoweth, and all the immortal gods, for whether of the twain the doom
of death is appointed.”

So spake the godlike man, and laid the lambs in his chariot, and
entered in himself, and drew back the reins; and by his side Antenor
mounted the splendid chariot. So they departed back again to Ilios; and
Hector son of Priam and goodly Odysseus first meted out a space, and
then they took the lots, and shook them in a bronze-bound helmet, to
know whether of the twain should first cast his spear of bronze. And
the people prayed and lifted up their hands to the gods; and thus would
say many an one of Achaians and Trojans: “Father Zeus, that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great; whichsoe’er it be that brought this
trouble upon both peoples, vouchsafe that he may die and enter the
house of Hades; that so for us peace may be assured and trusty oaths.”

So said they; and great Hector of the glancing plume shook the helmet,
looking behind him; and quickly leapt forth the lot of Paris. Then the
people sat them down by ranks where each man’s high-stepping horses and
inwrought armour lay. And upon his shoulders goodly Alexandros donned
his beauteous armour, even he that was lord to Helen of the lovely
hair. First upon his legs set he his greaves, beautiful, fastened with
silver ankle-clasps; next upon his breast he donned the corslet of his
brother Lykaon, and fitted it upon himself. And over his shoulders cast
he his silver-studded sword of bronze, and then a shield great and
sturdy. And on his mighty head he set a wrought helmet of horse-hair
crest, whereover the plume nodded terribly, and he took him a strong
spear fitted to his grasp. And in like wise warlike Menelaos donned his
armour.

So when they had armed themselves on either side in the throng, they
strode between Trojans and Achaians, fierce of aspect, and wonder came
on them that beheld, both on the Trojans tamers of horses and on the
well-greaved Achaians. Then took they their stand near together in the
measured space, brandishing their spears in wrath each against other.
First Alexandros hurled his far shadowing spear, and smote on Atreides’
round shield; but the bronze brake not through, for its point was
turned in the stout shield. Next Menelaos son of Atreus lifted up his
hand to cast, and made prayer to father Zeus: “King Zeus, grant me
revenge on him that was first to do me wrong, even on goodly
Alexandros, and subdue thou him at my hands; so that many an one of men
that shall be hereafter may shudder to wrong his host that hath shown
him kindness.”

So said he, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled, and smote
on the round shield of the son of Priam. Through the bright shield went
the ponderous spear and through the inwrought breastplate it pressed
on; and straight beside his flank the spear rent the tunic, but he
swerved and escaped black death. Then Atreides drew his silver-studded
sword, and lifted up his hand and smote the helmet-ridge; but the sword
shattered upon it into three, yea four, and fell from his hand. Thereat
Atreides looked up to the wide heaven and cried: “Father Zeus, surely
none of the gods is crueller than thou. Verily I thought to have gotten
vengeance on Alexandros for his wickedness, but now my sword breaketh
in my hand, and my spear sped from my grasp in vain, and I have not
smitten him.”

So saying, he leapt upon him and caught him by his horse-hair crest,
and swinging him round dragged him towards the well-greaved Achaians;
and he was strangled by the embroidered strap beneath his soft throat,
drawn tight below his chin to hold his helm. Now would Menelaos have
dragged him away and won glory unspeakable, but that Zeus’ daughter
Aphrodite was swift to mark, and tore asunder for him the strap of
slaughtered ox’s hide; so the helmet came away empty in his stalwart
hand. Thereat Menelaos cast it with a swing toward the well-greaved
Achaians, and his trusty comrades took it up; and himself sprang back
again eager to slay him with spear of bronze. But Aphrodite snatched up
Paris, very easily as a goddess may, and hid him in thick darkness, and
sent him down in his fragrant perfumed chamber; and herself went to
summon Helen. Her she found on the high tower, and about her the Trojan
women thronged. So with her hand she plucked her perfumed raiment and
shook it and spake to her in the likeness of an aged dame, a woolcomber
that was wont to work for her fair wool when she dwelt in Lakedaimon,
whom too she greatly loved. Even in her likeness fair Aphrodite spake:
“Come hither; Alexandros summoneth thee to go homeward. There is he in
his chamber and inlaid bed, radiant in beauty and vesture; nor wouldst
thou deem him to be come from fighting his foe, but rather to be faring
to the dance, or from the dance to be just resting and set down.”

So said she, and stirred Helen’s soul within her breast; and when now
she marked the fair neck and lovely breast and sparkling eyes of the
goddess, she marvelled straightway and spake a word and called upon her
name: “Strange queen, why art thou desirous now to beguile me? Verily
thou wilt lead me further on to some one of the people cities of
Phrygia or lovely Maionia, if there too thou hast perchance some other
darling among mortal men, because even now Menelaos hath conquered
goodly Alexandros, and will lead me, accursed me, to his home.
Therefore thou comest hither with guileful intent. Go and sit thou by
his side, and depart from the way of the gods; neither let thy feet
ever bear thee back to Olympus, but still be vexed for his sake and
guard him till he make thee his wife or perchance his slave. But
thither will I not go— that were a sinful thing—to array the bed of
him; all the women of Troy will blame me hereafter; and I have griefs
untold within my soul.”

Then in wrath bright Aphrodite spake to her: “Provoke me not, rash
woman, lest in mine anger I desert thee, and hate thee even as now I
love thee beyond measure, and lest I devise grievous enmities between
both, even betwixt Trojans and Achaians, and so thou perish in evil
wise.”

So said she, and Helen sprung of Zeus was afraid, and went wrapped in
her bright radiant vesture, silently, and the Trojan women marked her
not; and the goddess led the way.

Now when they were come to the beautiful house of Alexandros the
handmaidens turned straightway to their tasks, and the fair lady went
to the high-roofed chamber; and laughter-loving Aphrodite took for her
a chair and brought it, even she the goddess, and set it before the
face of Paris. There Helen took her seat, the child of aegis-bearing
Zeus, and with eyes turned askance spake and chode her lord: “Thou
comest back from battle; would thou hadst perished there, vanquished of
that great warrior that was my former husband. Verily it was once thy
boast that thou wast a better man than Menelaos dear to Ares, in the
might of thine arm and thy spear. But go now, challenge Menelaos, dear
to Ares to fight thee again face to face. Nay, but I, even I, bid thee
refrain, nor fight a fight with golden-haired Menelaos man to man,
neither attack him recklessly, lest perchance thou fall to his spear
anon.”

And Paris made answer to her and said: “Chide not my soul, lady, with
cruel taunts. For now indeed hath Menelaos vanquished me with Athene’s
aid, but another day may I do so unto him; for we too have gods with
us. But come now, let us have joy of love upon our couch; for never yet
hath love so enwrapped my heart—not even then when first I snatched
thee from lovely Lakedaimon and sailed with thee on my seafaring ships,
and in the isle of Kranaë had converse with thee upon thy couch in
love—as I love thee now and sweet desire taketh hold upon me.” So
saying he led the way to the couch, and the lady followed with him.

Thus laid they them upon their fretted couch; but Atreides the while
strode through the host like to a wild beast, if anywhere he might set
eyes on godlike Alexandros. But none of the Trojans or their famed
allies could discover Alexandros to Menelaos dear to Ares. Yet surely
did they in no wise hide him for kindliness, could any have seen him;
for he was hated of all even as black death. So Agamemnon king of men
spake among them there: “Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and
allies. Now is victory declared for Menelaos dear to Ares; give ye back
Helen of Argos and the possessions with her, and pay ye the recompense
such as is seemly, that it may live even among men that shall be
hereafter.” So said Atreides, and all the Achaians gave assent.




BOOK IV.


How Pandaros wounded Menelaos by treachery; and Agamemnon exhorted his
chief captains to battle.


Now the gods sat by Zeus and held assembly on the golden floor, and in
the midst the lady Hebe poured them their nectar: they with golden
goblets pledged one another, and gazed upon the city of the Trojans.
Then did Kronos’ son essay to provoke Hera with vexing words, and spake
maliciously: “Twain goddesses hath Menelaos for his helpers, even Hera
of Argos and Alalkomenean Athene. Yet these sit apart and take their
pleasure in beholding; but beside that other ever standeth
laughter-loving Aphrodite and wardeth off fate from him, and now hath
she saved him as he thought to perish. But of a truth the victory is to
Menelaos dear to Ares; so let us take thought how these things shall
be; whether once more we shall arouse ill war and the dread battle-din,
or put friendship between the foes. Moreover if this were welcome to
all and well pleasing, may the city of king Priam yet be an habitation,
and Menelaos take back Helen of Argos.”

So said he, but Athene and Hera murmured thereat, who were sitting by
him and devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace and
said not anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold
upon her: But Hera’s breast contained not her anger, and she spake:
“Most dread son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? How hast
thou the will to make my labour void and of none effect, and the sweat
of my toil that I sweated, when my horses were wearied with my
summoning of the host, to be the plague of Priam and his sons? Do as
thou wilt; but we other gods do not all approve thee.”

Then in sore anger Zeus the cloud-gatherer spake to her: “Good lack,
how have Priam and Priam’s sons done thee such great wrong that thou
art furiously minded to sack the stablished citadel of Ilios? Perchance
wert thou to enter within the gates and long walls and devour Priam
raw, and Priam’s sons and all the Trojans, then mightest thou assuage
thine anger. Do as thou art minded, only let not this quarrel hereafter
be to me and thee a sore strife between us both. And this moreover will
I say to thee, and do thou lay it to thy heart; whene’er I too be of
eager mind to lay waste a city where is the race of men that are dear
to thee, hinder thou not my wrath, but let me be, even as I yield to
thee of free will, yet with soul unwilling. For of all cities beneath
sun and starry heaven that are the dwelling of mortal men, holy Ilios
was most honoured of my heart, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the
good ashen spear. For never did mine altar lack the seemly feast, even
drink-offering and burnt-offering, the worship that is our due.”

Then Helen the ox-eyed queen made answer to him: “Of a surety three
cities are there that be dearest far to me, Argos and Sparta and
wide-wayed Mykene; these lay thou waste whene’er they are found hateful
to thy heart; not for them will I stand forth, nor do I grudge thee
them. For even if I be jealous and would forbid thee to overthrow them,
yet will my jealousy not avail, seeing that thou art stronger far than
I. Still must my labour too not be made of none effect; for I also am a
god, and my lineage is even as thine, and Kronos the crooked counsellor
begat me to the place of honour in double wise, by birthright, and
because I am named thy spouse, and thou art king among all the
immortals. Let us indeed yield each to other herein, I to thee and thou
to me, and the rest of the immortal gods will follow with us; and do
thou with speed charge Athene to betake her to the fierce battle din of
Trojans and Achaians, and to essay that the Trojans may first take upon
them to do violence to the Achaians in their triumph, despite the
oaths.”

So said she, and the father of men and gods disregarded not; forthwith
he spake to Athene winged words: “Betake thee with all speed to the
host, to the midst of Trojans and Achaians, and essay that the Trojans
may first take upon them to do violence to the Achaians in their
triumph, despite the oaths.”

So spake he, and roused Athene that already was set thereon; and from
Olympus’ heights she darted down. Even as the son of Kronos the crooked
counsellor sendeth a star, a portent for mariners or a wide host of
men, bright shining, and therefrom are scattered sparks in multitude;
even in such guise sped Pallas Athene to earth, and leapt into their
midst; and astonishment came on them that beheld, on horse-taming
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. And thus would many an one say,
looking at his neighbor: “Of a surety either shall sore war and the
fierce battle din return again; or else Zeus doth stablish peace
between the foes, even he that is men’s dispenser of battle.”

Thus would many an one of Achaians and Trojans say. Then the goddess
entered the throng of Trojans in the likeness of a man, even Antenor’s
son Laodokos, a stalwart warrior, and sought for godlike Pandaros, if
haply she might find him. Lykaon’s son found she, the noble and
stalwart, standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from the streams of Aisepos. So
she came near and spake winged words: “Wilt thou now hearken to me,
thou wise son of Lykaon? Then wouldst thou take heart to shoot a swift
arrow at Menelaos, and wouldst win favour and glory before all the
Trojans, and before king Alexandros most of all. Surely from him first
of any wouldst thou receive glorious gifts, if perchance he see
Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, vanquished by thy dart and brought to
the grievous pyre. Go to now, shoot at glorious Menelaos, and vow to
Apollo, the son of light,* the lord of archery, to sacrifice a goodly
hecatomb of firstling lambs when thou art returned to thy home, in the
city of holy Zeleia.”

* Or, perhaps, “the Wolf-born.”


So spake Athene, and persuaded his fool’s heart. Forthwith he
unsheathed his polished bow of horn of a wild ibex that he himself had
erst smitten beneath the breast as it came forth from a rock, the while
he awaited in a lurking-place; and had pierced it in the chest, so that
it fell backward on the rock. Now from its head sprang there horns of
sixteen palms; these the artificer, even the worker in horn, joined
cunningly together, and polished them all well and set the top of gold
thereon. So he laid it down when he had well strung it, by resting it
upon the ground; and his staunch comrades held their shields before
him, lest the warrior sons of the Achaians should first set on them,
ere Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, were smitten. Then opened he the lid
of his quiver and took forth a feathered arrow, never yet shot, a
source of grievous pangs; and anon he laid the bitter dart upon the
string and vowed to Apollo, the son of light, the lord of archery, to
sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when he should have
returned to his home in the city of holy Zeleia. Then he took the notch
and string of oxes’ sinew together, and drew, bringing to his breast
the string, and to the bow the iron head. So when he had now bent the
great bow into a round, the horn twanged, and the string sang aloud,
and the keen arrow leapt eager to wing his way amid the throng.

But the blessed gods immortal forgat not thee, Menelaos; and before all
the daughter of Zeus, the driver of the spoil, who stood before thee
and warded off the piercing dart. She turned it just aside from the
flesh, even as a mother driveth a fly from her child that lieth in
sweet slumber; and with her own hand guided it where the golden buckles
of the belt were clasped and the doubled breastplate met them. So the
bitter arrow lighted upon the firm belt; through the inwrought belt it
sped and through the curiously wrought breastplate it pressed on and
through the taslet* he wore to shield his flesh, a barrier against
darts; and this best shielded him, yet it passed on even through this.
Then did the arrow graze the warrior’s outermost flesh, and forthwith
the dusky blood flowed from the wound.

* An apron or belt set with metal, worn below the corslet.


As when some woman of Maionia or Karia staineth ivory with purple, to
make a cheek-piece for horses, and it is laid up in the treasure
chamber, and many a horseman prayeth for it to wear; but it is laid up
to be a king’s boast, alike an adornment for his horse and a glory for
his charioteer; even in such wise, Menelaos, were thy shapely thighs
stained with blood and thy legs and thy fair ankles beneath.

Thereat shuddered Agamemnon king of men when he saw the black blood
flowing from the wound. And Menelaos dear to Ares likewise shuddered;
but when he saw how thread* and barbs were without, his spirit was
gathered in his breast again. Then lord Agamemnon moaned deep, and
spake among them, holding Menelaos by the hand; and his comrades made
moan the while: “Dear brother, to thy death, meseemeth, pledged I these
oaths, setting thee forth to fight the Trojans alone before the face of
the Achaians; seeing that the Trojans have so smitten thee, and trodden
under foot the trusty oaths. Yet in no wise is an oath of none effect,
and the blood of lambs and pure drink-offerings and the right hands of
fellowship wherein we trusted. For even if the Olympian bring not about
the fulfilment forthwith, yet doth he fulfil at last, and men make dear
amends, even with their own heads and their wives and little ones. Yea
of a surety I know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy
Ilios to be laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen
spear; and Zeus the son of Kronos enthroned on high, that dwelleth in
the heaven, himself shall brandish over them all his lowring aegis, in
indignation at this deceit. Then shall all this not be void; yet shall
I have sore sorrow for thee, Menelaos, if thou die and fulfil the lot
of life. Yea in utter shame should I return to thirsty Argos, seeing
that the Achaians will forthwith bethink them of their native land, and
so should we leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of
Argos. And the earth shall rot thy bones as thou liest in Troy with thy
task unfinished: and thus shall many an overweening Trojan say as he
leapeth upon the tomb of glorious Menelaos: ‘Would to God Agamemnon
might so fulfil his wrath in every matter, even as now he led hither
the host of the Achaians for naught, and hath gone home again to his
dear native land with empty ships, and hath left noble Menelaos
behind.’ Thus shall men say hereafter: in that day let the wide earth
gape for me.”

* By which the iron head was attached to the shaft.


But golden-haired Menelaos encouraged him and said: “Be of good
courage, neither dismay at all the host of the Achaians. The keen dart
lighted not upon a deadly spot; my glistening belt in front stayed it,
and the kirtle of mail beneath, and the taslet that the coppersmiths
fashioned.”

Then lord Agamemnon answered him and said: “Would it may be so, dear
Menelaos. But the leech shall feel the wound, and lay thereon drugs
that shall assuage thy dire pangs.”

So saying he spake to godlike Talthybios, his herald: “Talthybios, with
all speed call Machaon hither, the hero son of Asklepios the noble
leech, to see Menelaos, Atreus’ warrior son, whom one well skilled in
archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath wounded with a bow-shot, to his
glory and our grief.”

So said he, and the herald heard him and disregarded not, and went his
way through the host of mail-clad Achaians to spy out the hero Machaon.
Him he found standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from Trike, pasture land of
horses. So he came near and spake his winged words: “Arise, thou son of
Asklepios. Lord Agamemnon calleth thee to see Menelaos, captain of the
Achaians, whom one well skilled in archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath
wounded with a bow-shot, to his glory and our grief.”

So saying he aroused his spirit in his breast, and they went their way
amid the throng, through the wide host of the Achaians. And when they
were now come where was golden-haired Menelaos wounded, and all as many
as were chieftains gathered around him in a circle, the godlike hero
came and stood in their midst, and anon drew forth the arrow from the
clasped belt; and as it was drawn forth the keen barbs were broken
backwards. Then he loosed the glistering belt and kirtle of mail
beneath and taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned; and when he saw the
wound where the bitter arrow had lighted, he sucked out the blood and
cunningly spread thereon soothing drugs, such as Cheiron of his good
will had imparted to his sire.

While these were tending Menelaos of the loud war-cry, the ranks of
shield-bearing Trojans came on; so the Achaians donned their arms
again, and bethought them of the fray. Now wouldest thou not see noble
Agamemnon slumbering, nor cowering, nor unready to fight, but very
eager for glorious battle. He left his horses and his chariot adorned
with bronze; and his squire, even Eurymedon son of Ptolemaios
Peiraieus’ son, kept apart the snorting steeds; and he straitly charged
him to have them at hand whenever weariness should come upon his limbs
with marshalling so many; and thus on foot ranged he through the ranks
of warriors. And whomsoever of all the fleet-horsed Danaans he found
eager, he stood by them and by his words encouraged them: “Ye Argives,
relax not in any wise your impetuous valour; for father Zeus will be no
helper of liars, but as these were first to transgress against the
oaths, so shall their own tender flesh be eaten of the vultures, and we
shall bear away their dear wives and little children in our ships, when
once we take the stronghold.”

But whomsoever he found shrinking from hateful battle, these he chode
sore with angry words: “Ye Argives, warriors of the bow, ye men of
dishonour, have ye no shame? Why stand ye thus dazed like fawns that
are weary with running over the long plain and so stand still, and no
valour is found in their hearts at all? Even thus stand ye dazed, and
fight not. Is it that ye wait for the Trojans to come near where your
good ships’ sterns are drawn up on the shore of the grey sea, to see if
Kronion will stretch his arm over you indeed?”

So masterfully ranged he through the ranks of warriors. Then came he to
the Cretans as he went through the throng of warriors; and these were
taking arms around wise Idomeneus; Idomeneus amid the foremost, valiant
as a wild boar, and Meriones the while was hastening his hindermost
battalions. Then Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to see them, and anon
spake to Idomeneus with kindly words: “Idomeneus, more than all the
fleet-horsed Danaans do I honour thee, whether in war or in task of
other sort or in the feast, when the chieftains of the Argives mingle
in the bowl the gleaming wine of the counsellor. For even though all
the other flowing-haired Achaians drink one allotted portion, yet thy
cup standeth ever full even as mine, to drink as oft as they soul
biddeth thee. Now arouse thee to war like such an one as thou avowest
thyself to be of old.”

And Idomeneus the captain of the Cretans made answer to him: “Atreides,
of very truth will I be to thee a trusty comrade even as at the first I
promised and gave my pledge; but do thou urge on all the flowing-haired
Achaians, that we may fight will all speed, seeing the Trojans have
disannulled the oaths. But for all that death and sorrow hereafter
shall be their lot, because they were the first to transgress against
the oaths.”

So said he, and Agamemnon passed on glad at heart. Then came he to the
Aiantes as he went through the throng of warriors; and these twain were
arming, and a cloud of footmen followed with them. Even as when a
goatherd from a place of outlook seeth a cloud coming across the deep
before the blast of the west wind; and to him being afar it seemeth
ever blacker, even as pitch, as it goeth along the deep, and bringeth a
great whirlwind, and he shuddereth to see it and driveth his flock
beneath a cave; even in such wise moved the serried battalions of young
men, the fosterlings of Zeus, by the side of the Aiantes into furious
war, battalions dark of line, bristling with shields and spears. And
lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see them and spake to them winged words, and
said: “Aiantes, leaders of the mail-clad Argives, to you twain, seeing
it is not seemly to urge you, give I no charge; for of your own selves
ye do indeed bid your folk to fight amain. Ah, father Zeus and Athene
and Apollo, would that all had like spirit in their breasts; then would
king Priam’s city soon bow captive and wasted beneath our hands.”

So saying he left them there, and went to others. Then found he Nestor,
the clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, arraying his comrades, and
urging them to fight, around great Pelagon and Alastor and Chromios and
lord Haimon and Bias shepherd of the host. And first he arrayed the
horsemen with horses and chariots, and behind them the footmen many and
brave, to be a bulwark of battle; but the cowards he drave into the
midst, that every man, even though he would not, yet of necessity must
fight. First he laid charge upon the horsemen; these he bade hold in
their horses nor be entangled in the throng. “Neither let any man,
trusting in his horsemanship and manhood, be eager to fight the Trojans
alone before the rest, nor yet let him draw back, for so will ye be
enfeebled. But whomsoever a warrior from the place of his own car can
come at a chariot of the foe, let him thrust forth with his spear; even
so is the far better way. Thus moreover did men of old time lay low
cities and walls, because they had this mind and spirit in their
breasts.”

So did the old man charge them, being well skilled of yore in battles.
And lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see hem, and spake to him winged words,
and said: “Old man, would to god that, even as thy spirit is in thine
own breast, thy limbs might obey and thy strength be unabated. But the
common lot of age is heavy upon thee; would that it had come upon some
other man, and thou wert amid the young.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Atreides, I verily, even
I too, would wish to be as on the day when I slew noble Ereuthalion.
But the gods in no wise grant men all things at once. As I was then a
youth, so doth old age now beset me. Yet even so will I abide among the
horsemen and urge them by counsel and words; for that is the right of
elders. But the young men shall wield the spear, they that are more
youthful than I and have confidence in their strength.”

So spake he, and Atreides passed on glad at heart. He found Menestheus
the charioteer, the son of Peteos, standing still, and round him were
the Athenians, masters of the battle-cry. And hard by stood crafty
Odysseus, and round about him the ranks of Kephallenians, no feeble
folk, stood still; for their host had not yet heard the battle-cry,
seeing the battalions of horse-taming Trojans and Achaians had but just
bestirred them to move; so these stood still tarrying till some other
column of the Achaians should advance to set upon the Trojans and begin
the battle. But when Agamemnon king of men saw it, he upbraided them,
and spake to them winged words, saying: “O son of king Peteos
fosterling of Zeus, and thou skilled in evil wiles, thou cunning of
mind, why stand ye shrinking apart, and tarry for others? You beseemeth
it to stand in your place amid the foremost and to front the fiery
battle; for ye are the first to hear my bidding to the feast, as oft as
we Achaians prepare a feast for the counsellors. Then are ye glad to
eat roast meat and drink your cups of honey-sweet wine as long as ye
will. But now would ye gladly behold it, yea, if ten columns of
Achaians in front of you were fighting with the pitiless sword.”

But Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely at him and said:
“Atreides, what word is this that hath escaped the barrier of thy lips?
How sayest thou that we are slack in battle? When once our* Achaians
launch furious war on the Trojans, tamers of horses, then shalt thou,
if thou wilt, and if thou hast any care therefor, behold Telemachos’
dear father mingling with the champions of the Trojans, the tamers of
horses. But that thou sayest is empty as air.”

* Or, “that we are slack in battle, when once we Achaians,” putting the
note of interrogation after “tamers of horses.”


Then lord Agamemnon spake to him smiling, seeing how he was wroth, and
took back his saying: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus full of
devices, neither do I chide thee beyond measure nor urge thee; for I
know that thy heart within thy breast is kindly disposed; for thy
thoughts are as my thoughts. Go to, we will make amends hereafter, if
any ill word hath been spoken now; may the gods bring it all to none
effect.”

So saying he left them there and went on to others. The son of Tydeus
found he, high-hearted Diomedes, standing still with horses and chariot
well compact; and by him stood Sthenelos son of Kapaneus. Him lord
Agamemnon saw and upbraided, and spake to him winged words, and said:
“Ah me, thou son of wise Tydeus tamer of horses, why shrinkest thou,
why gazest thou at the highways of the battle? Not thus was Tydeus wont
to shrink, but rather to fight his enemies far in front of his dear
comrades, as they say that beheld him at the task; for never did I meet
him nor behold him, but men say that he was preeminent amid all. Of a
truth he came to Mykene, not in enmity, but as a guest with godlike
Polyneikes, to raise him an army for the war that they were levying
against the holy walls of Thebes; and they besought earnestly that
valiant allies might be given them, and our folk were fain to grant
them and made assent to their entreaty, only Zeus showed omens of ill
and turned their minds. So when these were departed and were come on
their way, and had attained to Asopos deep in rushes, that maketh his
bed in grass, there did the Achaians appoint Tydeus to be their
ambassador. So he went and found the multitude of the sons of Kadmos
feasting in the palace of mighty Eteokles. Yet was knightly Tydeus,
even though a stranger, not afraid, being alone amid the multitude of
the Kadmeians, but challenged them all to feats of strength, and in
every one vanquished he them easily; so present a helper was Athene
unto him. But the Kadmeians, the urgers of horses, were wroth, and as
he fared back again they brought and set a strong ambush, even fifty
young men, whose leaders were twain, Maion son of Haimon, like to the
immortals, and Autophonos’ son Polyphontes staunch in battle. Still
even on the Tydeus brought shameful death; he slew them all, save one
that he sent home alone; Maion to wit he sent away in obedience to the
omens of heaven. Such was Tydeus of Aitolia; but he begat a son that in
battle is worse than he; only in harangue is he the better.”

So said he, and stalwart Diomedes made no answer, but had respect to
the chiding of the king revered. But the son of glorious Kapaneus
answered him: “Atreides, utter not falsehood, seeing thou knowest how
to speak truly. We avow ourselves to be better men by far than our
fathers were: we did take the seat of Thebes the seven gated, though we
led a scantier host against a stronger wall, because we followed the
omens of the gods and the salvation of Zeus; but they perished by their
own iniquities. Do not thou therefore in any wise have our fathers in
like honour with us.”

But stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him, and said: “Brother, sit
silent and obey my saying. I grudge not that Agamemnon shepherd of the
host should urge on the well-greaved Achaians to fight; for him the
glory will attend if the Achaians lay the Trojans low and take holy
Ilios; and his will be the great sorrow if the Achaians be laid low. Go
to now, let us too bethink us of impetuous valour.”

He spake and leapt in his armour from the chariot to earth, and
terribly rang the bronze upon the chieftain’s breast as he moved;
thereat might fear have come even upon one stout-hearted.

As when on the echoing beach the sea-wave lifteth up itself in close
array before the driving of the west wind; out on the deep doth it
first raise its head, and then breaketh upon the land and belloweth
aloud and goeth with arching crest about the promontories, and speweth
the foaming brine afar; even so in close array moved the battalions of
the Danaans without pause to battle. Each captain gave his men the
word, and the rest went silently; thou wouldest not deem that all the
great host following them had any voice within their breasts; in
silence feared they their captains. On every man glittered the
inwrought armour wherewith they went clad. But for the Trojans, like
sheep beyond number that stand in the courtyard of a man of great
substance, to be milked of their white milk, and bleat without ceasing
to hear their lambs’ cry, even so arose the clamour of the Trojans
through the wide host. For they had not all like speech nor one
language, but their tongues were mingled, and they were brought from
many lands. These were urged on of Ares, and those of bright-eyed
Athene, and Terror and Rout, and Strife whose fury wearieth not, sister
and friend of murderous Ares; her crest is but lowly at the first, but
afterward she holdeth up her head in heaven and her feet walk upon the
earth. She now cast common discord in their midst, as she fared through
the throng and made the lamentation of men to wax.

Now when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed
they targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed
shields pressed each on each and mighty din arose. Then were heard the
voice of groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and
the slain, and the earth streamed with blood. As when two winter
torrents flow down the mountains to a watersmeet and join their furious
flood within the deep ravine from their great springs, and the shepherd
heareth the roaring far off among the hills: even so from the joining
of battle came there forth shouting and travail. Antilochos first slew
a Trojan warrior in full array, valiant amid the champions, Echepolos
son of Thalysios; him was he first to smite upon the ridge of his
crested helmet, and he drave the spear into his brow and the point of
bronze passed within the bone; darkness clouded his eyes, and he
crashed like a tower amid the press of fight. As he fell lord Elephenor
caught him by the foot, Chalkodon’s son, captain of the great-hearted
Abantes, and dragged him from beneath the darts, eager with all speed
to despoil him of his armour. Yet but for a little endured his essay;
great-hearted Agenor saw him haling away the corpse, and where his side
was left uncovered of his buckler as he bowed him down, there smote he
him with bronze-tipped spear-shaft and unstrung his limbs. So his life
departed from him, and over his corpse the task of Trojans and Achaians
grew hot; like wolves leapt they one at another, and man lashed at man.

Next Telamonian Aias smote Anthemion’s son, the lusty stripling
Simoeisios, whose erst his mother bare beside the banks of Simoeis on
the way down from Ida whither she had followed with her parents to see
their flocks. Therefore they called him Simoeisios, but he repaid not
his dear parents the recompense of his nurture; scanty was his span of
life by reason of the spear of great-hearted Aias that laid him low.
For as he went he first was smitten on his right breast beside the pap;
straight through his shoulder passed the spear of bronze, and he fell
to the ground in the dust like a poplar-tree, that hath grown up smooth
in the lowland of a great marsh, and its branches grow upon the top
thereof; this hath a wainwright felled with gleaming steel, to bend him
a felloe for a goodly chariot, and so it lies drying by a river’s
banks. In such a fashion did heaven-sprung Aias slay Simoeisios son of
Anthemion; then at him Antiphos of the glancing corslet, Priam’s son,
made a cast with his keen javelin across the throng. Him he missed, but
smote Odysseus’ valiant comrade Leukos in the groin as he drew the
corpse his way, so that he fell upon it and the body dropped from his
hands. Then Odysseus was very wroth at heart for the slaying of him,
and strode through the forefront of the battle harnessed in flashing
bronze, and went and stood hard by and glanced around him, and cast his
bright javelin; and the Trojans shrank before the casting of the hero.
He sped not the dart in vain, but smote Demokoon, Priam’s bastard son
that had come to him from tending his fleet mares in Abydos. Him
Odysseus, being wroth for his comrade’s sake, smote with his javelin on
one temple; and through both temples passed the point of bronze, and
darkness clouded his eyes, and he fell with a crash and his armour
clanged upon him. Then the forefighters and glorious Hector yielded,
and the Argives shouted aloud, and drew the bodies unto them, and
pressed yet further onward. But Apollo looked down from Pergamos, and
had indignation, and with a shout called to the Trojans: “Arise, ye
Trojans, tamers of horses; yield not to the Argives in fight; not of
stone nor iron is their flesh, that it should resist the piercing
bronze when they are smitten. Moreover Achilles, son of Thetis of the
fair tresses, fighteth not, but amid the ships broodeth on his bitter
anger.”

So spake the dread god from the city; and the Achaians likewise were
urged on of Zeus’ daughter the Triton-born, most glorious, as she
passed through the throng wheresoever she beheld them slackening.

Next was Diores son of Amrynkeus caught in the snare of fate; for he
was smitten by a jagged stone on the right leg hard by the ankle, and
the caster thereof was captain of the men of Thrace, Peiroös son of
Imbrasos that had come from Ainos. The pitiless stone crushed utterly
the two sinews and the bones; back fell he in the dust, and stretched
out both his hands to his dear comrades, gasping out his soul. Then he
that smote him, even Peiroos, sprang at him and pierced him with a
spear beside the navel; so all his bowels gushed forth upon the ground,
and darkness clouded his eyes. But even as Peiroos departed from him
Thoas of Aitolia smote with a spear his chest above the pap, and the
point fixed in his lung. Then Thoas came close, and plucked out from
his breast the ponderous spear, and drew his sharp sword, wherewith he
smote his belly in the midst, and took his life. Yet he stripped not
off his armour; for his comrades, the men of Thrace that wear the
top-knot, stood around, their long spears in their hands, and albeit he
was great and valiant and proud they drave him off from them and he
gave ground reeling. So were the two captains stretched in the dust
side by side, he of the Thracians and he of the mail-clad Epeians; and
around them were many others likewise slain.

Now would none any more enter in and make light of the battle, could it
be that a man yet unwounded by dart or thrust of keen bronze might roam
in the midst, being led of Pallas Athene by the hand, and by her
guarded from the flying shafts. For many Trojans that day and many
Achaians were laid side by side upon their faces in the dust.




BOOK V.


How Diomedes by his great valour made havoc of the Trojans, and wounded
even Aphrodite and Ares by the help of Athene.


But now to Tydeus’ son Diomedes Pallas Athene gave might and courage,
for him to be pre-eminent amid all the Argives and win glorious renown.
She kindled flame unwearied from his helmet and shield, like to the
star of summer that above all others glittereth bright after he hath
bathed in the ocean stream. In such wise kindled she flame from his
head and shoulders and sent him into the midst, where men thronged the
thickest.

Now there was amid the Trojans one Dares, rich and noble, priest of
Hephaistos; and he had two sons, Phegeus and Idaios, well skilled in
all the art of battle. These separated themselves and assailed him face
to face, they setting on him from their car and he on foot upon the
ground. And when they were now come near in onset on each other, first
Phegeus hurled his far-shadowing spear; and over Tydeides’ left
shoulder the spear point passed, and smote not his body. Then next
Tydeides made a spear-cast, and the javelin sped not from his hand in
vain, but smote his breast between the nipples, and thrust him from the
chariot. So Idaios sprang away, leaving his beautiful car, and dared
not to bestride his slain brother; else had neither he himself escaped
black fate: but Hephaistos guarded him and saved him in a veil of
darkness, that he might not have his aged priest all broken with
sorrow. And the son of great-hearted Tydeus drave away the horses and
gave them to his men to take to the hollow ships. But when the
great-hearted Trojans beheld the sons of Dares, how one was fled, and
one was slain beside his chariot, the spirit of all was stirred. But
bright-eyed Athene took impetuous Ares by the hand and spake to him and
said: “Ares, Ares, blood-stained bane of mortals, thou stormer of
walls, can we not now leave the Trojans and Achaians to fight, on
whichsoever it be that father Zeus bestoweth glory? But let us twain
give place, and escape the wrath of Zeus.”

So saying she led impetuous Ares from the battle. Then she made him sit
down beside loud Skamandros, and the Danaans pushed the Trojans back.
Each one of the captains slew his man; first Agamemnon king of men
thrust from his chariot the lord of the Halizonians, great Odios; for
as he first turned to flight Agamemnon thrust his dart into his back
between his shoulders, and drave it through his breast. And he fell
with a crash, and his armour clanged upon him.

And Idomeneus slew Phaistos son of Boros the Maionian, that came from
deep-soiled Tarne. Him in the act to mount upon his car spear-famed
Idomeneus pierced with his long dart through his right shoulder; and he
fell from the car and hateful darkness gat hold of him.

Him then Idomeneus’ squires despoiled; and Skamandrios, son of
Strophios, cunning in the chase, fell to the keen-pointed spear of
Menelaos son of Atreus; even he the mighty hunter, whom Artemis herself
had taught to shoot all manner of wild things that the mountain forest
breedeth. But now did Archer Artemis avail him naught nor all his
marksmanship wherein of old time he excelled; but spear-famed Menelaos
son of Atreus smote him with his dart as he fled before him, in his
back [between his shoulders, and pierced through his breast]. So he
fell prone and his armour clanged upon him.

And Meriones slew Phereklos, son of Tekton Harmon’s son, whose hands
were cunning to make all manner of curious work; for Pallas Athene
loved him more than all men. He likewise built Alexandros the trim
ships, source of ills, that were made the bane of all the Trojans and
of himself, because he knew not the oracles of heaven. Him Meriones
pursued, and overtaking him smote him in the right buttock, and right
through passed the point straight to the bladder beneath the bone; and
he fell to his knees with a cry, and death overshadowed him.

Then Meges slew Pedaios Antenor’s son, that was a bastard; yet goodly
Theano nurtured him carefully like to her own children, to do her
husband pleasure. To him Phyleus’ spear-famed son came near, and with
keen dart smote him upon the sinew of the head; and right through amid
the teeth the point of bronze cleft the tongue’s root. So he fell in
the dust, and bit the cold bronze with his teeth.

And by Eurypylos, Euaimon’s son, noble Hypsenor son of high-hearted
Dolopion that was appointed Skamandros’ priest and like to a god was
held in honour of the folk—by Eurypylos Euaimon’s glorious son, he as
he fled before him was pursued and smitten on the shoulder with a
sword-thrust, and his heavy arm was shorn away. All bleeding the arm
fell upon the earth; and over his eyes came gloomy death and forceful
fate.

So laboured these in the violent mellay; but of Tydeides man could not
tell with whom he were joined, whether he consorted with Trojans or
with Achaians. For he stormed across the plain like a winter torrent at
the full, that in swift course scattereth the causeys; neither can the
long lines of* causeys hold it in, nor the fences of fruitful orchards
stay its sudden coming when the rain of heaven driveth it; and so
before it perish in multitudes the fair works of the sons of men. Thus
before Tydeides the serried battalions of the Trojans were overthrown,
and they abode him not for all they were so many.

* Reading ἐερμέναι, with Aristarchos.


But when Lykaon’s glorious son marked him storming across the plain,
overthrowing battalions before him, anon he bent his crooked bow
against Tydeides, and smote him as he sped onwards, hitting hard by his
right shoulder the plate of his corslet; the bitter arrow flew through
and held straight upon its way, and the corslet was dabbled with blood.
Over him then loudly shouted Lykaon’s glorious son: “Bestir you,
great-hearted Trojans, urgers of horses; the best man of the Achaians
is wounded, and I deem that he shall not for long endure the violent
dart, if verily the king, the son of Zeus,* sped me on my way from
Lykia.”

* Apollo


So spake he boasting; yet was the other not vanquished of the swift
dart, only he gave place and stood before his horses and his chariot
and spake to Sthenelos son of Kapaneus: “Haste thee, dear son of
Kapaneus; descend from thy chariot, to draw me from my shoulder the
bitter arrow.”

So said he, and Sthenelos leapt from his chariot to earth and stood
beside him and drew the swift shaft right through, out of his shoulder;
and the blood darted up through the pliant tunic. Then Diomedes of the
loud war-cry prayed thereat: “Hear me, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,
unwearied maiden! If ever in kindly mood thou stoodest by my father in
the heat of battle, even so now be thou likewise kind to me, Athene.
Grant me to slay this man, and bring within my spear-cast him that took
advantage to shoot me, and boasteth over me, deeming that not for long
shall I see the bright light of the sun.”

So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs
nimble, his feet and his hands withal, and came near and spake winged
words: “Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight the Trojans; for in
thy breast I have set thy father’s courage undaunted, even as it was in
knightly Tydeus, wielder of the buckler. Moreover I have taken from
thine eyes the mist that erst was on them, that thou mayest well
discern both god and man. Therefore if any god come hither to make
trial of thee, fight not thou face to face with any of the immortal
gods; save only if Aphrodite daughter of Zeus enter into the battle,
her smite thou with the keen bronze.”

So saying bright-eyed Athene went her way and Tydeides returned and
entered the forefront of the battle; even though erst his soul was
eager to do battle with the Trojans, yet now did threefold courage come
upon him, as upon a lion whom some shepherd in the field guarding his
fleecy sheep hath wounded, being sprung into the fold, yet hath not
vanquished him; he hath roused his might, and then cannot beat him
back, but lurketh amid the steading, and his forsaken flock is
affrighted; so the sheep are cast in heaps, one upon the other, and the
lion in his fury leapeth out of the high fold; even so in fury mingled
mighty Diomedes with the Trojans.

There slew he Astynoos and Hypeiron shepherd of the host; the one he
pierced above the nipple with his bronze-shod dart, the other with his
great sword upon the collar-bone beside the shoulder he smote, and
severed the shoulder from neck and back. Them left he there, and
pursued after Abas and Polyidos, sons of old Eurydamas dreamer of
dreams; yet discerned he no dreams for them when they went,* but
stalwart Diomedes despoiled them. Then went he after Xanthos and Thoon,
sons of Phainops, striplings both; but their father was outworn of
grievous age, and begat no other son for his possessions after him.
Then Diomedes slew them and bereft the twain of their dear life, and
for their father left only lamentation and sore distress, seeing he
welcomed them not alive returned from battle; and kinsmen divided his
substance.

* Or, “yet came they not home for him to discern dreams for them.”


Then caught he two sons of Priam of the seed of Dardanos, riding in one
chariot, Echemmon and Chromios. As a lion leapeth among the kine and
breaketh the neck of cow or heifer grazing in a woodland pasture, so
Tydeus’ son thrust in ill wise from their chariot both of them
unwilling, and thereafter despoiled them of their arms; and the horses
gave he to his comrades to drive them to the ships.

Him Aineias beheld making havoc of the ranks of warriors, and went his
way along the battle and amid the hurtling of spears, seeking godlike
Pandaros, if haply he might find him. Lykaon’s son he found, the noble
and stalwart, and stood before his face, and spake a word unto him.
“Pandaros, where now are thy bow and thy winged arrows, and the fame
wherein no man of this land rivalleth thee, nor any in Lykia boasteth
to be thy better? Go to now, lift thy hands in prayer to Zeus and shoot
thy dart at this fellow, whoe’er he be that lordeth it here and hath
already wrought the Trojans much mischief, seeing he hath unstrung the
knees of many a brave man; if indeed it be not some god wroth with the
Trojans, in anger by reason of sacrifices; the wrath of god is a sore
thing to fall on men.”*

* Or, “and the wrath of gods be heavy upon us.”


And Lykaon’s glorious son made answer to him: “Aineias, counsellor of
the mail-clad Trojans, in everything liken I him to the wise son of
Tydeus; I discern him by his shield and crested helmet, and by the
aspect of his horses; yet know I not surely if it be not a god. But if
it be the man I deem, even the wise son of Tydeus, then not without
help of a god is he thus furious, but some immortal standeth beside him
with a cloud wrapped about his shoulders and turned aside from him my
swift dart even as it lighted. For already have I shot my dart at him
and smote his right shoulder right through the breastplate of his
corslet, yea and I thought to hurl him headlong to Aidoneus, yet I
vanquished him not; surely it is some wrathful god. And I have no
steeds at hand nor any chariot whereon to mount—yet in Lykaon’s halls
are eleven fair chariots, new wrought, with gear all fresh, and cloths
spread over them; and beside each standeth a yoke of horses, champing
white barley and spelt. Moreover Lykaon the aged spearman at my
departing laid instant charge upon me in our well-builded house; he
bade me mount horse and chariot to lead the Trojans in the violent
mellay; but I obeyed him not—far better had that been!—but spared the
horses lest in the great crowd of men they should lack fodder that had
been wont to feed their fill. Therefore I left them and am come on foot
to Ilios, trusting to my bow; and now must my bow not help me! Already
have I aimed at two princes, Tydeus’ and Atreus’ sons, and both I smote
and surely drew forth blood, yet only roused them the more. Therefore
in an evil hour I took from the peg my curved bow on that day when I
led my Trojans to lovely Ilios, to do noble Hector pleasure. But if I
return and mine eyes behold my native land and wife and great palace
lofty-roofed, then may an alien forthwith cut my head from me if I
break not this bow with mine hands and cast it upon the blazing fire;
worthless is its service to me as air.”

Then Aineias captain of the Trojans answered him: “Nay, talk not thus;
naught shall be mended before that we with horses and chariot have gone
to face this man, and made trial of him in arms. Come then, mount upon
my car that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or for fleeing hither or thither very fleetly
across the plain; they will e’en bring us to the city safe and sound,
even though Zeus hereafter give victory to Diomedes son of Tydeus. Come
therefore, take thou the lash and shining reins, and I will stand upon
the car to fight;* or else withstand thou him, and to the horses will I
look.”

* Reading ἐπιβήσομαι, with Zenodotos.


To him made answer Lykaon’s glorious son: “Aineias, take thou thyself
the reins and thine own horses; better will they draw the curved car
for their wonted charioteer, if perchance it hap that we must flee from
Tydeus’ son; lest they go wild for fear and will not take us from the
fight, for lack of thy voice, and so the son of great-hearted Tydeus
attack us and slay us both and drive away the whole-hooved horses. So
drive thou thyself thy chariot and thy horses, and I will await his
onset with my keen spear.” So saying mounted they upon the well-dight
chariot, and eagerly drave the fleet horses against Tydeides. And
Sthenelos, the glorious son of Kapaneus, saw them, and anon spake to
Tydeides winged words: “Diomedes son of Tydeus, dear to mine heart, I
behold two stalwart warriors eager to fight against thee, endued with
might beyond measure. The one is well skilled in the bow, even
Pandaros, and he moreover boasteth him to be Lykaon’s son; and Aineias
boasteth himself to be born son of great-hearted Anchises, and his
mother is Aphrodite. Come now, let us give place upon the chariot,
neither rage thou thus, I pray thee, in the forefront of battle, lest
perchance thou lose thy life.”

Then stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him and said: “Speak to me no
word of flight, for I ween that thou shalt not at all persuade me; not
in my blood is it to fight a skulking fight or cower down; my force is
steadfast still. I have no mind to mount the chariot, nay, even as I am
will I go to face them; Pallas Athene biddeth me not be afraid. And as
for these, their fleet horses shall not take both back from us again,
even if one or other escape. And this moreover tell I thee, and lay
thou it to heart: if Athene rich in counsel grant me this glory, to
slay them both, then refrain thou here these my fleet horses, and bind
the reins tight to the chariot rim; and be mindful to leap upon
Aineias’ horses, and drive them forth from the Trojans amid the
well-greaved Achaians. For they are of that breed whereof farseeing*
Zeus gave to Tros recompense for Ganymede his child, because they were
the best of all horses beneath the daylight and the sun. That blood
Anchises king of men stole of Laomedon, privily putting mares to them.
Thereof a stock was born him in his palace, even six; four kept he
himself and reared them at the stall, and the other twain gave he to
Aineias deviser of rout.** Them could we seize, we should win us great
renown.”

* Or, “Zeus of the far-borne voice.”


** Reading μήστωρι.


In such wise talked they one to the other, and anon those other twain
came near, driving their fleet horses. First to him spake Lykaon’s
glorious son: “O thou strong-souled and cunning, son of proud Tydeus,
verily my swift dart vanquished thee not, the bitter arrow; so now will
I make trial with my spear if I can hit thee.”

He spake and poised and hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon
Tydeides’ shield; right through it sped the point of bronze and reached
the breastplate. So over him shouted loudly Lykaon’s glorious son:
“Thou art smitten on the belly right through, and I ween thou shalt not
long hold up thine head; so thou givest me great renown.”

But mighty Diomedes unaffrighted answered him: “Thou hast missed, and
not hit; but ye twain I deem shall not cease till one or other shall
have fallen and glutted with blood Ares the stubborn god of war.”

So spake he and hurled; and Athene guided the dart upon his nose beside
the eye, and it pierced through his white teeth. So the hard bronze cut
through his tongue at the root and the point issued forth by the base
of the chin. He fell from his chariot, and his splendid armour gleaming
clanged upon him, and the fleet-footed horses swerved aside; so there
his soul and strength were unstrung.

Then Aineias leapt down with shield and long spear, fearing lest
perchance the Achaians might take from him the corpse; and strode over
him like a lion confident in his strength, and held before him his
spear and the circle of his shield, eager to slay whoe’er should come
to face him, crying his terrible cry. Then Tydeides grasped in his hand
a stone—a mighty deed—such as two men, as men now are, would not avail
to lift; yet he with ease wielded it all alone. Therewith he smote
Aineias on the hip where the thigh turneth in the hip-joint, and this
men call the “cup-bone.” So he crushed his cup-bone, and brake both
sinews withal, and the jagged stone tore apart the skin. Then the hero
stayed fallen upon his knees and with stout hand leant upon the earth;
and the darkness of night veiled his eyes. And now might Aineias king
of men have perished, but that Aphrodite daughter of Zeus was swift to
mark, even his mother that conceived him by Anchises as he tended the
kine. About her dear son wound she her white arms, and spread before
his face a fold of her radiant vesture, to be a covering from the
darts, lest any of the fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into
his breast and take away his life.

So was she bearing her dear son away from battle; but the son of
Kapaneus forgat not the behest that Diomedes of the loud war-cry had
laid upon him; he refrained his own whole-hooved horses away from the
tumult, binding the reins tight to the chariot-rim, and leapt on the
sleek-coated horses of Aineias, and drave them from the Trojans to the
well-greaved Achaians, and gave them to Deïpylos his dear comrade whom
he esteemed above all that were his age-fellows, because he was
like-minded with himself; and bade him drive them to the hollow ships.
Then did the hero mount his own chariot and take the shining reins and
forthwith drive his strong-hooved horses in quest of Tydeides, eagerly.
Now Tydeides had made onslaught with pitiless weapon on Kypris,*
knowing how she was a coward goddess and none of those that have
mastery in battle of the warriors—no Athene she nor Enyo waster of
cities. Now when he had pursued her through the dense throng and come
on her, then great-hearted Tydeus’ son thrust with his keen spear, and
leapt on her and wounded the skin of her weak hand; straight through
the ambrosial raiment that the Graces themselves had woven her pierced
the dart into the flesh, above the springing of the palm. Then flowed
the goddess’s immortal blood, such ichor as floweth in the blessed
gods; for they eat no bread neither drink they gleaming wine, wherefore
they are bloodless and are named immortals. And she with a great cry
let fall her son: him Phoebus Apollo took into his arms and saved him
in a dusky cloud, lest any of the fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the
spear into his breast and take away his life. But over her Diomedes of
the loud war-cry shouted afar: “Refrain thee, thou daughter of Zeus,
from war and fighting. Is it not enough that thou beguilest feeble
women? But if in battle thou wilt mingle, verily I deem that thou shalt
shudder at the name of battle, if thou hear it even afar off.”

* Aphrodite.


So spake he, and she departed in amaze and was sore troubled: and
wind-footed Iris took her and led her from the throng tormented with
her pain, and her fair skin was stained. There found she impetuous Ares
sitting, on the battle’s left; and his spear rested upon a cloud, and
his fleet steeds. Then she fell on her knees and with instant prayer
besought of her dear brother his golden-frontleted steeds: “Dear
brother, save me and give me thy steeds, that I may win to Olympus,
where is the habitation of the immortals. Sorely am I afflicted with a
wound wherewith a mortal smote me, even Tydeides, who now would fight
even with father Zeus.”

So spake she, and Ares gave her his golden-frontleted steeds, and she
mounted on the chariot sore at heart. By her side mounted Iris, and in
her hands grasped the reins and lashed the horses to start them; and
they flew onward nothing loth. Thus soon they came to the habitation of
the gods, even steep Olympus. There wind-footed fleet Iris loosed the
horses from the chariot and stabled them, and set ambrosial forage
before them; but fair Aphrodite fell upon Dione’s knees that was her
mother. She took her daughter in her arms and stroked her with her
hand, and spake and called upon her name: “Who now of the sons of
heaven, dear child, hath entreated thee thus wantonly, as though thou
wert a wrong-doer in the face of all?”

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite made answer to her: “Tydeus’ son wounded
me, high-hearted Diomedes, because I was saving from the battle my dear
son Aineias, who to me is dearest far of all men. For no more is the
fierce battle-cry for Trojans and Achaians, but the Danaans now are
fighting even the immortals.”

Then the fair goddess Dione answered her: “Be of good heart, my child,
and endure for all thy pain; for many of us that inhabit the mansions
of Olympus have suffered through men, in bringing grievous woes one
upon another. So suffered Ares, when Otos and stalwart Ephialtes, sons
of Aloeus, bound him in a strong prison-house; yea in a vessel of
bronze lay he bound thirteen months. Then might Ares insatiate of
battle have perished, but that the step-mother of Aloeus’ sons, fair
Eëriboia, gave tidings to Hermes, and he stole away Ares, already
pining; for the grievous prison-house was wearing him out. So suffered
Hera when Amphitryon’s stalwart son smote her on the right breast with
a three-barbed arrow, so that pain unassuageable gat hold of her
likewise. So suffered awful Hades a swift arrow like the rest, when
this same man, the son of aegis-bearing Zeus, smote him in Pylos* amid
the dead and gave him over to anguish. And he went to the mansion of
Zeus and to high Olympus, grieved at heart, pierced through with
anguish; for the arrow was driven into his stout shoulder, and vexed
his soul. But Paieon spread soothing drugs upon the wound and healed
him; seeing that verily he was of no mortal substance. Headstrong man
and violent of deed, that recked not of his evil doings, and with his
archery vexed the gods that dwell in Olympus! So upon thee was this man
sent by the bright-eyed goddess Athene; fond man—for the heart of
Tydeus’ son knoweth not this, that he of a surety is not long-lived
that fighteth with immortals, nor ever do his children prattle upon his
knees at his returning from war and terrible fray. Therefore now let
Tydeides, though he be very mighty, beware lest one better than thou
encounter him; and so Aigialeia, wise daughter of Adrestos, wake from
sleep with lamentations all her household, bewailing her wedded lord,
the best man of the Achaians, even she that is the brave wife of
horse-taming Diomedes.”

* Or, “at the gate of hell.” according to Aristarchos.


So saying with both hands she wiped the ichor from the arm; her arm was
comforted, and the grievous pangs assuaged. But Athene and Hera beheld,
and with bitter words provoked Zeus the son of Kronos. Of them was the
bright-eyed goddess Athene first to speak: “Father Zeus, wilt thou
indeed be wroth with me whate’er I say? Verily I ween that Kypris was
urging some woman of Achaia to join her unto the Trojans whom she so
marvellously loveth; and stroking such an one of the fair-robed women
of Achaia, she tore upon the golden brooch her delicate hand.”

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and called unto
him golden Aphrodite and said: “Not unto thee, my child, are given the
works of war; but follow thou after the loving tasks of wedlock, and to
all these things shall fleet Ares and Athene look.”

Now while they thus spake in converse one with the other, Diomedes of
the loud war-cry leapt upon Aineias, knowing full well that Apollo
himself had spread his arms over him; yet reverenced he not even the
great god, but still was eager to slay Aineias and strip from him his
glorious armour. So thrice he leapt on him, fain to slay him, and
thrice Apollo beat back his glittering shield. And when the fourth time
he sprang at him like a god, then Apollo the Far-darter spake to him
with terrible shout: “Think, Tydeides, and shrink, nor desire to match
thy spirit with gods; seeing there is no comparison of the race of
immortal gods and of men that walk upon the earth.”

So said he, and Tydeides shrank a short space backwards, to avoid the
wrath of Apollo the Far-darter. Then Apollo set Aineias away from the
throng in holy Pergamos where his temple stood. There Leto and Archer
Artemis healed him in the mighty sanctuary, and gave him glory; but
Apollo of the silver bow made a wraith like unto Aineias’ self, and in
such armour as his; and over the wraith Trojans and goodly Achaians
each hewed the others’ bucklers on their breasts, their round shields
and fluttering targes.

Then to impetuous Ares said Phoebus Apollo: “Ares, Ares, blood-stained
bane of mortals, thou stormer of walls, wilt thou not follow after this
man and withdraw him from the battle, this Tydeides, who now would
fight even with father Zeus? First in close fight he wounded Kypris in
her hand hard by the wrist, and then sprang he upon myself like unto a
god.”

So saying he sate himself upon the height of Pergamos, and baleful Ares
entered among the Trojan ranks and aroused them in the likeness of
fleet Akamas, captain of the Thracians. On the heaven-nurtured sons of
Priam he called saying: “O ye sons of Priam, the heaven-nurtured king,
how long will ye yet suffer your host to be slain of the Achaians?
Shall it be even until they fight about our well-builded gates? Low
lieth the warrior whom we esteemed like unto goodly Hector, even
Aineias son of Anchises great of heart. Go to now, let us save from the
tumult our valiant comrade.”

So saying he aroused the spirit and soul of every man. Thereat Sarpedon
sorely chode noble Hector: “Hector, where now is the spirit gone that
erst thou hadst? Thou saidst forsooth that without armies or allies
thou wouldest hold the city, alone with thy sisters’ husbands and thy
brothers; but now can I not see any of these neither perceive them, but
they are cowering like hounds about a lion; and we are fighting that
are but allies among you. Yea I being an ally am come from very far;
far off is Lykia upon eddying Xanthos, where I left my dear wife and
infant son, and left my great wealth that each one coveteth that is in
need. Yet for all that I urge on my Lykians, and myself am eager to
fight my man, though here is naught of mine such as the Achaians might
plunder or harry. But thou standest, nay thou dost not even urge all
thine hosts to abide and guard their wives. Only beware lest, as though
tangled in meshes of all-ensnaring flax, ye be made unto your foemen a
prey and a spoil; and they will soon lay waste your well-peopled city.
Thee it behoveth to give thought to all these things both by night and
day, and to beseech the captains of thy far-famed allies to hold on
unflinchingly; and so shalt thou put away their sore rebuking from
thee.”

So spake Sarpedon, and his word stung Hector to the heart, Forthwith he
leapt from his chariot in his armour to the earth, and brandishing two
keen spears went everywhere through the host, urging them to fight, and
roused the dread battle-cry. So they were rallied and stood to face the
Achaians: and the Argives withstood them in close array and fled not.
Even as a wind carrieth the chaff about the sacred threshing-floors
when men are winnowing, what time golden-haired Demeter in rush of wind
maketh division of grain and chaff, and so the chaff-heaps grow
white—so now grew the Achaians white with falling dust which in their
midst the horses’ hooves beat up into the brazen heaven, as fight was
joined again, and the charioteers wheeled round. Thus bare they forward
the fury of their hands: and impetuous Ares drew round them a veil of
night to aid the Trojans in the battle,* ranging everywhere; so
fulfilled he the behest of Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who bade
him rouse the Trojans’ spirit when he beheld Pallas Athene departed;
for she was helper to the Danaans. And Apollo himself sent forth
Aineias from his rich sanctuary and put courage in the heart of him,
shepherd of the hosts. So Aineias took his place amid his comrades, and
they were glad to see him come among them alive and sound and full of
valiant spirit. Yet they questioned him not at all, for all the toil
forbade them that the god of the silver bow was stirring and Ares bane
of men and Strife raging insatiably.

* Or, drew round the battle a veil of night to help the Trojans.


And on the other side the two Aiantes and Odysseus and Diomedes stirred
the Danaans to fight; yet these of themselves feared neither the
Trojans’ violence nor assaults, but stood like mists that Kronos’ son
setteth in windless air on the mountain tops, at peace, while the might
of the north wind sleepeth and of all the violent winds that blow with
keen breath and scatter apart the shadowing clouds. Even so the Danaans
withstood the Trojans steadfastly and fled not. And Atreides ranged
through the throng exhorting instantly: “My friends, quit you like men
and take heart of courage, and shun dishonour in one another’s eyes
amid the stress of battle. Of men that shun dishonour more are saved
than slain, but for them that flee is neither glory found nor any
safety.”

So saying he darted swiftly with his javelin and smote a foremost
warrior, even great-hearted Aineias’ comrade Deïkoon son of Pergasos,
whom the Trojans held in like honour with Priam’s sons, because he was
swift to do battle amid the foremost. Him lord Agamemnon smote with his
dart upon the shield, and it stayed not the spear, but the point passed
through, so that he drave it through the belt into his nethermost
belly: and he fell with a crash and his armour clanged upon him.

Then did Aineias slay two champions of the Danaans, even the sons of
Diokles, Krethon and Orsilochos, whose father dwelt in stablished
Phere, a man full of substance, whose lineage was of the river
Alpheios, that floweth in broad stream through the land of the Pylians;
Alpheios begat Orsilochos to be king of many men, and Orsilochos begat
great-hearted Diokles, and of Diokles were born twin sons, even Krethon
and Orsilochos, well skilled in all the ways of war. Now when these
were of full age, they bare the Argives company on their black ships to
Ilios home of horses, to win recompense for Atreus’ sons, Agamemnon and
Menelaos; but now the issue of death shrouded them about. Like them,
two lions on the mountain tops are nurtured by their dam in the deep
forest thickets; and these harry the kine and goodly sheep and make
havoc of the farmsteads of men, till in their turn they too are slain
at men’s hands with the keen bronze; in such wise were these twain
vanquished at Aineias’ hands and fell like tall pine-trees.

But Menelaos dear to Ares had pity of them in their fall, and strode
through the forefront, harnessed in flashing bronze, brandishing his
spear; and Ares stirred his courage, with intent that he might fall
beneath Aineias’ hand. But Antilochos, great-hearted Nestor’s son,
beheld him, and strode through the forefront; because he feared
exceedingly for the shepherd of the host, lest aught befall him and
disappoint them utterly of their labour. So those two were now holding
forth their hands and sharp spears each against the other, eager to do
battle; when Antilochos came and stood hard by the shepherd of the
host. But Aineias faced them not, keen warrior though he was, when he
beheld two men abiding side by side; so these haled away the corpses to
the Achaians’ host, and laid the hapless twain in their comrades’ arms,
and themselves turned back and fought on amid the foremost.

Then slew they Pylaimenes, peer of Ares, captain of the great-hearted
Paphlagonians bearers of the shield. Him as he stood still Atreus’ son,
spear-famed Menelaos, pierced with his javelin, smiting upon the
collar-bone; and Antilochos hurled at Mydon, his squire and charioteer,
Atymnios’ brave son, even as he was wheeling the whole-hooved horses,
and with a stone smote his elbow in the midst; so the reins white with
ivory fell from his hands to earth, even into the dust. Then Antilochos
sprang on him and drave the sword into his temple, and he fell gasping
from the well-wrought chariot headlong in the dust on crown and
shoulders. A while he stood there, being lighted on deep sand, until
his horses spurned him and cast him to earth, even in the dust; and
them Antilochos lashed, and drave them to the Achaians’ host.

But Hector marked them across the ranks, and sprang on them with a
shout, and the battalions of the Trojans followed him in their might:
and Ares led them on and dread Enyo, she bringing ruthless turmoil of
war, the while Ares wielded in his hands his monstrous spear, and
ranged now before Hector’s face, and now behind.

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered to behold him; and even as
a shiftless man crossing a great plain cometh on a swift-streaming
river flowing on to the sea, and seeing it boil with foam springeth
backwards, even so now Tydeides shrank back and spake to the host:
“Friends, how marvel we that noble Hector is a spearman and bold man of
war! Yet ever is there beside him some god that wardeth off
destruction; even as now Ares is there by him in likeness of a mortal
man. But with faces towards the Trojans still give ground backwards,
neither be desirous to fight amain with gods.”

So said he, and the Trojans came very close upon them. Then Hector slew
two that knew well the battle joy, riding in one chariot, even
Menesthes and Anchialos. And the great Telamonian Aias had pity of them
in their fall, and came hard by and darted with his bright javelin, and
smote Amphios son of Selagos, that dwelt in Paisos, a man rich in
substance, rich in meadow land; but fate led him to bring succour to
Priam and his sons. Him Telamonian Aias smote upon the belt, and in his
nether belly the far-shadowing spear stuck and he fell with a crash.
Then glorious Aias ran at him to strip him of his armour, and the
Trojans rained on him keen javelins glittering, and his shield caught
many thereof. But he set his heel upon the corpse and plucked forth the
spear of bronze; only he could not strip from his shoulders all the
fair armour therewith, being overwhelmed of spears. Moreover he feared
the haughty Trojans’ stout defence, they being many and brave that with
their spears pressed on him, so that for all he was so great and
valiant and proud they thrust him from them; and he was shaken and
shrank back.

Thus toiled these in violent battle; and Tlepolemos son of Herakles,
valiant and tall, was driven of forceful fate against godlike Sarpedon.
Then when the twain were come nigh in onset on each other, even the son
and grandson of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, then first to the other spake
Tlepolemos: “Sarpedon, counsellor of the Lykians, why must thou be
skulking here, being a man unskilled in battle? Falsely do men say that
thou art offspring of aegis-bearing Zeus, seeing thou art found lacking
greatly beside those men that in days of old were born of Zeus. Ah,
what an one do men say* was mighty Herakles, even my father the
steadfast lion-heart, who erst came hither for Laomedon’s mares with
but six ships and a scantier host, yet sacked the city of Ilios and
made her highways desolate. But thine is a base spirit, and thy folk
are minishing. I ween that thou art in no wise come from Lykia to be a
bulwark unto the Trojans, for all thy great strength, but that thou
shalt be vanquished at my hand and pass the gates of Hades.”

* Or, “of other sort, men say,” if we read ἀλλοῖον for ἀλλ’ οῖον.


Then Sarpedon captain of the Lykians answered him: “Tlepolemos, he
verily overthrew holy Ilios by the folly of the proud man Laomedon,
that rewarded his good deed with harsh upbraiding, and paid him not the
steeds wherefor he came from afar. And for thee I say that slaughter
and black death shall come about here at my hands; vanquished by my
spear thou shalt yield to me my glory, and thy life to Hades of the
goodly steeds.”

So spake Sarpedon, and Tlepolemos lifted his ashen spear, and both
their long javelins sped from their hands together. Sarpedon smote the
midst of his neck, and the grievous point past right through, and the
darkness of night fell on his eyes and shrouded him: and Tlepolemos
with long spear smote the other’s left thigh, and the point sped
through furiously, grazing the bone; but his father yet warded off
destruction.

So his goodly comrades bare away godlike Sarpedon from the battle, but
the long spear dragging was heavy upon him, and no man marked it or
took thought in their haste to draw the ashen spear out from his thigh
that he might stand upright; such labour had they in tending him. And
over against them the well-greaved Achaians bare Tlepolemos from the
battle. And noble Odysseus of the patient soul marked it, and his heart
was stirred within him. Then doubted he in mind and soul whether first
to pursue the son of Zeus the loud thunderer, or take the lives of the
common sort of the Lykians. But it was not destined to great-hearted
Odysseus to slay with his keen blade the mighty son of Zeus; so Athene
turned his fury upon the multitude of the Lykians. Then slew he
Koiranos and Alastor and Chromios and Alkandros and Halios and Noëmon
and Prytanis; and yet more Lykians had noble Odysseus slain but that
great Hector of the glancing helm was swift to mark him, and strode
through the forefront of battle, harnessed in flashing bronze, and
brought terror to the Danaans; but Sarpedon the son of Zeus was glad at
his coming, and spake to him a word of pain: “O son of Priam, let me
not now be left a prey unto the Danaans, but bring me succour; howbeit
thereafter let my life depart from me in your city, seeing it might not
be that I should return home to my dear native land, to make glad my
dear wife and infant son.”

So said he, but Hector of the glancing helm spake no word to him, but
hastened on, desirous with all speed to thrust back the Argives and
take the lives of many. So his goodly comrades made godlike Sarpedon to
sit beneath a fair oak-tree of aegis-bearing Zeus, and valiant Pelagon
that was his dear comrade thrust forth from his thigh the ashen spear;
and his spirit failed him and mist overspread his eyes. Then breathed
he again, and the breath of the north wind blew round about him and
brought him to life from the grievous swoon of his soul.

Now the Argives before the face of Ares and mail-clad Hector neither
turned them round about toward their black ships, nor charged forward
in battle, but still fell backward, when they heard of Ares amid the
Trojans. And now who first was slaughtered, and who last, by Hector son
of Priam and brazen Ares? Even godlike Teuthras, and thereafter Orestes
the charioteer, and Trechos spearman of Aitolia, and Oinomaos and
Helenos son of Oinops and Oresbios with gleaming taslets, who dwelt in
Hyle and had great care of his substance, lying beside the Kephisian
mere; and near him dwelt all the Boiotians, inhabiters of a full rich
domain.

Now when the white-armed goddess Hera marked them making havoc of the
Argives in the press of battle, anon she spake winged words to Athene:
“Out on it, thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Was
it for naught we pledged our word to Menelaos, that he should not
depart till he had laid waste well-walled Ilios,—if thus we let baleful
Ares rage? Go to now, let us twain also take thought of impetuous
valour.”

So said she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not. So
Hera the goddess queen, daughter of Kronos, went her way to harness the
gold-frontleted steeds; and Hebe quickly put to the car the curved
wheels of bronze, eight-spoked, upon their axle-tree of iron. Golden is
their felloe, imperishable, and tires of bronze are fitted thereover, a
marvel to look upon; and the naves are of silver, to turn about on
either side. And the car is plaited tight with gold and silver thongs,
and two rails run round about it. And the silver pole stood out
therefrom; upon the end bound she the fair golden yoke, and set thereon
the fair breaststraps of gold, and Hera led beneath the yoke the horses
fleet of foot, and hungered for strife and the battle-cry. And Athene,
daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, cast down at her father’s threshold her
woven vesture many-coloured, that herself had wrought and her hands had
fashioned, and put on her the tunic of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, and
arrayed her in her armour for dolorous battle. About her shoulders cast
she the tasselled aegis terrible, whereon is Panic as a crown all round
about, and Strife is therein and Valour and horrible Onslaught withal,
and therein is the dreadful monster’s Gorgon head, dreadful and grim,
portent of aegis-bearing Zeus. Upon her head set she the two-crested
golden helm with fourfold plate, bedecked with men-at-arms of a hundred
cities. Upon the flaming chariot set she her foot, and grasped her
heavy spear, great and stout, wherewith she vanquisheth the ranks of
men, even of heroes with whom she of the awful sire is wroth. Then Hera
swiftly smote the horses with the lash; self-moving groaned upon their
hinges the gates of heaven whereof the Hours are warders, to whom is
committed great heaven and Olympus, whether to throw open the thick
cloud or set it to. There through the gates guided they their horses
patient of the lash. And they found the son of Kronos sitting apart
from all the gods on the topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus. Then the
white-armed goddess Hera stayed her horses and questioned the most high
Zeus, the son of Kronos, and said: “Father Zeus, hast thou no
indignation with Ares for these violent deeds? How great and goodly a
company of Achaians hath he destroyed recklessly and in unruly wise,
unto my sorrow. But here in peace Kypris and Apollo of the silver bow
take their pleasure, having set on this mad one that knoweth not any
law. Father Zeus, wilt thou at all be wroth with me if I smite Ares and
chase him from the battle in sorry plight?”

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said to her: “Go to now, set
upon him Athene driver of the spoil, who most is wont to bring sore
pain upon him.”

So spake he, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not, and
lashed her horses; they nothing loth flew on between earth and starry
heaven. As far as a man seeth with his eyes into the haze of distance
as he sitteth on a place of outlook and gazeth over the wine-dark sea,
so far leap the loudly neighing horses of the gods. Now when they came
to Troy and the two flowing rivers, even to where Simoeis and
Skamandros join their streams, there the white-armed goddess Hera
stayed her horses and loosed them from the car and poured thick mist
round about them, and Simoeis made ambrosia spring up for them to
graze. So the goddesses went their way with step like unto
turtle-doves, being fain to bring succour to the men of Argos. And when
they were now come where the most and most valiant stood, thronging
about mighty Diomedes tamer of horses, in the semblance of ravening
lions or wild boars whose strength is nowise feeble, then stood the
white-armed goddess Hera and shouted in the likeness of great-hearted
Stentor with voice of bronze, whose cry was loud as the cry of fifty
other men: “Fie upon you, Argives, base things of shame, so brave in
semblance! While yet noble Achilles entered continually into battle,
then issued not the Trojans even from the Dardanian gate; for they had
dread of his terrible spear. But now fight they far from the city at
the hollow ships.”

So saying she aroused the spirit and soul of every man. And to
Tydeides’ side sprang the bright-eyed goddess Athene. That lord she
found beside his horses and chariot, cooling the wound that Pandaros
with his dart had pierced, for his sweat vexed it by reason of the
broad baldrick of his round shield; therewith was he vexed and his arm
grew weary, so he was lifting up the baldrick and wiping away the dusky
blood. Then the goddess laid her hand on his horses’ yoke, and said:
“Of a truth Tydeus begat a son little after his own likeness. Tydeus
was short of stature, but a man of war; yea even when I would not have
him fight nor make display—what time he came apart from the Achaians on
an embassage to Thebes, to the midst of the multitude of the Kadmeians,
I bade him feast in their halls at peace; but he, possessing his
valiant soul as of old time, challenged the young men of the Kadmeians
and in everything vanquished them [easily; so sure a helper was I unto
him]. But for thee, beside thee stand I and guard thee and with all my
heart bid thee fight the Trojans; yet either hath weariness of much
striving entered into thy limbs, or disheartening terror hath taken
hold of thee. If that be so, no offspring art thou of Tydeus, the wise
son of Oineus.”

And stalwart Diomedes made answer to her and said: “I know thee,
goddess daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus: therefore with my whole heart
will I tell thee my thought and hide it not. Neither hath disheartening
terror taken hold upon me, nor any faintness, but I am still mindful of
thy behest that thou didst lay upon me. Thou forbadest me to fight face
to face with all the blessed gods, save only if Zeus’ daughter
Aphrodite should enter into battle, then to wound her with the keen
bronze. Therefore do I now give ground myself and have bidden all the
Argives likewise to gather here together; for I discern Ares lording it
in the fray.”

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene answered him: “Diomedes son of
Tydeus, thou joy of mine heart, fear thou, for that, neither Ares nor
any other of the immortals; so great a helper am I to thee. Go to now,
at Ares first guide thou thy whole-hooved horses, and smite him hand to
hand, nor have any awe of impetuous Ares, raving here, a curse
incarnate, the renegade that of late in converse with me and Hera
pledged him to fight against the Trojans and give succour to the
Argives, but now consorteth with the Trojans and hath forgotten these.”

So speaking, with her hand she drew back Sthenelos and thrust him from
the chariot to earth, and instantly leapt he down; so the goddess
mounted the car by noble Diomedes’ side right eagerly. The oaken axle
creaked loud with its burden, bearing the dread goddess and the man of
might. Then Pallas Athene grasped the whip and reins; forthwith against
Ares first guided she the whole-hooved horses. Now he was stripping
huge Periphas, most valiant far of the Aitolians, Ochesios’ glorious
son. Him was blood-stained Ares stripping; and Athene donned the helm
of Hades, that terrible Ares might not behold her. Now when Ares
scourge of mortals beheld noble Diomedes, he left huge Periphas lying
there, where at the first he had slain him and taken away his life, and
made straight at Diomedes tamer of horses. Now when they were come nigh
in onset on one another, first Ares thrust over the yoke and horse’s
reins with spear of bronze, eager to take away his life. But the
bright-eyed goddess Athene with her hand seized the spear and thrust it
up over* the car, to spend itself in vain. Next Diomedes of the loud
war-cry attacked with spear of bronze; and Pallas Athene drave it home
against Ares’ nethermost belly, where his taslets were girt about him.
There smote he him and wounded him, rending through his fair skin, and
plucked forth the spear again. Then brazen Ares bellowed loud as nine
thousand warriors or ten thousand cry in battle as they join in strife
and fray. Thereat trembling gat hold of Achaians and Trojans for fear,
so mightily bellowed Ares insatiate of battle.

Reading ὑπέρ with the best MS. for ὐπ’ ἐκ.


Even as gloomy mist appeareth from the clouds when after heat a stormy
wind ariseth, even so to Tydeus’ son Diomedes brazen Ares appeared amid
clouds, faring to wide heaven. Swiftly came he to the gods’ dwelling,
steep Olympus, and sat beside Zeus son of Kronos with grief at heart,
and shewed the immortal blood flowing from the wound, and piteously
spake to him winged words: “Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation to
behold these violent deeds? For ever cruelly suffer we gods by one
another’s devices, in shewing men grace. With thee are we all at
variance, because thou didst beget that reckless maiden and baleful,
whose thought is ever of iniquitous deeds. For all the other gods that
are in Olympus hearken to thee, and we are subject every one; only her
thou chastenest not, neither in deed nor word, but settest her on,
because this pestilent one is thine own offspring. Now hath she urged
on Tydeus’ son, even overweening Diomedes, to rage furiously against
the immortal gods. Kypris first he wounded in close fight, in the wrist
of her hand, and then assailed he me, even me, with the might of a god.
Howbeit my swift feet bare me away; else had I long endured anguish
there amid the grisly heaps of dead, or else had lived strengthless
from the smitings of the spear.”

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer looked sternly at him and said: “Nay, thou
renegade, sit not by me and whine. Most hateful to me art thou of all
gods that dwell in Olympus: thou ever lovest strife and wars and
battles. Truly thy mother’s spirit is intolerable, unyielding, even
Hera’s; her can I scarce rule with words. Therefore I deem that by her
prompting thou art in this plight. Yet will I no longer endure to see
thee in anguish; mine offspring art thou, and to me thy mother bare
thee. But wert thou born of any other god unto this violence, long ere
this hadst thou been lower than the sons of Heaven.”*

* The Titans, imprisoned in Tartaros. Others explain “lower than the
heavenly gods.” Zenodotos read ἐνέρτατος, “lowest of the sons of
heaven.”


So spake he and bade Paieon heal him. And Paieon laid assuaging drugs
upon the wound [and healed him; seeing he was verily of no mortal
substance]. Even as fig juice maketh haste to thicken white milk, that
is liquid but curdleth speedily as a man stirreth, even so swiftly
healed he impetuous Ares. And Hebe bathed him, and clothed him in
gracious raiment, and he sate him down by Zeus son of Kronos, glorying
in his might.

Then fared the twain back to the mansion of great Zeus, even Hera of
Argos and Alalkomenean Athene, having stayed Ares scourge of mortals
from his man-slaying.




BOOK VI.


How Diomedes and Glaukos, being about to fight, were known to each
other, and parted in friendliness. And how Hector returning to the city
bade farewell to Andromache his wife.


So was the dread fray of Trojans and Achaians left to itself, and the
battle swayed oft this way and that across the plain, as they aimed
against each other their bronze-shod javelins, between Simoeis and the
streams of Xanthos.

First Aias son of Telamon, bulwark of the Achaians, brake a battalion
of the Trojans and brought his comrades salvation, smiting a warrior
that was chiefest among the Thracians, Eussoros’ son Akamas the goodly
and great. Him first he smote upon his thick-crested helmet-ridge and
drave into his forehead, so that the point of bronze pierced into the
bone; and darkness shrouded his eyes.

Then Diomedes of the loud wrar-cry slew Axylos Teuthranos’ son that
dwelt in stablished Arisbe, a man of substance dear to his fellows; for
his dwelling was by the roadside and he entertained all men. Howbeit of
all these was there then not one to meet the foe before his face and
save him from fell destruction; but Diomedes took the life of both of
them, even of him and Kalesios his squire that now was the driver of
his chariot; so passed both below the earth.

And Euryalos slew Dresos and Opheltios, and followed after Aisepos and
Pedasos whom erst the fountain-nymph Abarbarea bare to noble Boukolion.
Now Boukolion was son of proud Laomedon, his eldest born, begotten of a
mother unwedded; and as he tended his flocks he had converse with the
nymph in love, and she conceived and bare twin sons. And lo, the
strength of these and their glorious limbs Mekisteus’ son unstrung, and
stripped the armour from their shoulders. And stubborn Polypoites slew
Astyalos, and Odysseus with spear of bronze laid low Pidytes of
Perkote, and so did Teukros to goodly Aretaon. Then was Ableros killed
by the glistening spear of Antilochos, Nestor’s son, and Elatos by
Agamemnon king of men; beside the banks of fair-flowing Satnioeis dwelt
he in steep Pedasos. And Leïtos the warrior caught Phylakos, as he
fled; and Eurypylos slew Melanthios.

Now did Menelaos of the loud war-cry take Adrestos alive; for his
horses took flight across the plain, and stumbling in a tamarisk bough
brake the curved car at the pole’s foot; so they themselves fared
towards the city where the rest were fleeing in rout, and their lord
rolled from out the car beside the wheel, prone in the dust upon his
face. Then came Atreus’ son Menelaos to his side bearing his far-
shadowing spear. Thereat Adrestos caught him by his knees and besought
him: “Take me captive, thou son of Atreus, and accept a worthy ransom;
many a treasure is stored up in my father’s rich palace, bronze and
gold and smithied iron; thereof would my father yield thee ransom
beyond the telling, if he but heard that I am alive at the ships of the
Achaians.”

So spake he, and moved the spirit in his breast. And now had he
forthwith given him to his squire to lead him to the Achaians’ fleet
ships, but that Agamemnon came running to meet him, and spake a word of
chiding to him: “Good Menelaos, why art thou so careful of the foemen?
Have then such good deeds been wrought thee in thy house by Trojans? Of
them let not one escape sheer destruction at our hands, not even the
man-child that the mother beareth in her womb; let not even him escape,
but all perish together out of Ilios, uncared for and unknown.”

So spake the hero and turned his brother’s mind with righteous
persuasion; so with his hand he thrust the hero Adrestos from him, and
lord Agamemnon smote him in the flank, and he was overthrown, and
Atreus’ son set his heel upon his chest and plucked forth his ashen
spear.

Then Nestor called to the Argives with far-reaching shout: “My friends,
Danaan warriors, men of Ares’ company, let no man now take thought of
spoils to tarry behind, that he may bring the greatest burden to the
ships; but let us slay the foemen. Thereafter shall ye at your ease
also strip of their spoil the dead corpses about the plain.”

So spake he and stirred the spirit and soul of every man. Now had the
Trojans been chased again by the Achaians, dear to Ares, up into Ilios,
in their weakness overcome, but that Priam’s son Helenos, far best of
augurs, stood by Aineias’ side and Hector’s, and spake to them:
“Aineias and Hector, seeing that on you lieth the task of war in chief
of Trojans and Lykians, because for every issue ye are foremost both
for fight and counsel, stand ye your ground, and range the host
everywhither to rally them before the gates, ere yet they fall fleeing
in their women’s arms, and be made a rejoicing to the foe. Then when ye
have aroused all our battalions we will abide here and fight the
Danaans, though in sore weariness; for necessity presseth us hard: but
thou, Hector, go into the city, and speak there to thy mother and mine;
let her gather the aged wives to bright-eyed Athene’s temple in the
upper city, and with her key open the doors of the holy house; and let
her lay the robe, that seemeth to her the most gracious and greatest in
her hall and far dearest unto herself, upon the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene; and vow to her to sacrifice in her temple
twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will have mercy
on the city and the Trojans’ wives and little children. So may she
perchance hold back Tydeus’ son from holy Ilios, the furious spearman,
the mighty deviser of rout, whom in good sooth I deem to have proved
himself mightiest of the Achaians. Never in this wise feared we
Achilles, prince of men, who they say is born of a goddess; nay, but he
that we see is beyond measure furious; none can match him for might.”

So spake he, and Hector disregarded not his brother’s word, but leapt
forthwith from his chariot in his armour to earth, and brandishing two
sharp spears passed everywhere through the host, rousing them to
battle, and stirred the dread war-cry. So they were rallied and stood
to face the Achaians, and the Argives gave ground and ceased from
slaughter, and deemed that some immortal had descended from starry
heaven to bring the Trojans succour, in such wise rallied they. Then
Hector called to the Trojans with far-reaching shout: “O high-souled
Trojans and ye far-famed allies, quit you like men, my friends, and
take thought of impetuous courage, while I depart to Ilios and bid the
elders of the council and our wives pray to the gods and vow them
hecatombs.”

So saying Hector of the glancing helm departed, and the black hide beat
on either side against his ankles and his neck, even the rim that ran
uttermost about his bossed shield.

Now Glaukos son of Hippolochos and Tydeus’ son met in the mid-space of
the foes, eager to do battle. Thus when the twain were come nigh in
onset on each other, to him first spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry:
“Who art thou, noble sir, of mortal men? For never have I beheld thee
in glorious battle ere this, yet now hast thou far outstripped all men
in thy hardihood, seeing thou abidest my far-shadowing spear. Luckless
are the fathers whose children face my might. But if thou art some
immortal come down from heaven, then will not I fight with heavenly
gods. Nay moreover even Dryas’ son mighty Lykurgos was not for long
when he strove with heavenly gods, he that erst chased through the
goodly land of Nysa the nursing-mothers of frenzied Dionysos; and they
all cast their wands upon the ground, smitten with murderous Lykurgos’
ox-goad. Then Dionysos fled and plunged beneath the salt sea-wave, and
Thetis took him to her bosom, affrighted, for a mighty trembling had
seized him at his foe’s rebuke. But with Lykurgos the gods that live at
ease were wroth, and Kronos’ son made him blind, and he was not for
long, because he was hated of all the immortal gods. So would neither I
be fain to fight the blessed gods. But if thou art of men that eat the
fruit of the field, come nigh, that anon thou mayest enter the toils of
destruction.”

Then Hippolochos’ glorious son made answer to him: “Great-hearted
Tydeides, why enquirest thou of my generation? Even as are the
generations of leaves such are those likewise of men; the leaves that
be the wind scattereth on the earth, and the forest buddeth and putteth
forth more again, when the season of spring is at hand; so of the
generations of men one putteth forth and another ceaseth. Yet if thou
wilt, have thine answer, that thou mayest well know our lineage,
whereof many men have knowledge. There is a city Ephyre in the heart of
Argos, pasture land of horses, and there dwelt Sisyphos that was
craftiest of men, Sisyphos son of Aiolos; and he begat a son, even
Glaukos, and Glaukos begat noble Bellerophon. To him the gods granted
beauty and lovely manhood; but Proitos in his heart devised ill for
him, and being mightier far drave him from the land of the Argives,
whom Zeus had made subject to his sceptre.* Now Proitos’ wife, goodly
Anteia, lusted after him, to have converse in secret love, but no whit
prevailed she, for the uprightness of his heart, on wise Bellerophon.
Then spake she lyingly to king Proitos: “Die, Proitos, or else slay
Bellerophon, that would have converse in love with me against my will.”
So spake she, and anger gat hold upon the king at that he heard. To
slay him he forbare, for his soul had shame of that; but he sent him to
Lykia, and gave him tokens of woe, graving in a folded tablet many
deadly things, and bade him shew these to Anteia’s father, that he
might be slain. So fared he to Lykia by the blameless convoy of the
gods. Now when he came to Lykia and the stream of Xanthos, then did the
king of wide Lykia honour him with all his heart; nine days he
entertained him and killed nine oxen. And when on the tenth day
rosy-fingered dawn appeared, then he questioned him and asked to see
what token he bare from his son-in-law, even Proitos. Now when he had
received of him Proitos’ evil token, first he bade him slay Chimaira
the unconquerable. Of divine birth was she and not of men, in front a
lion, and behind a serpent, and in the midst a goat; and she breathed
dread fierceness of blazing fire. And her he slew, obedient to the
signs of heaven. Next fought he with the famed Solymi; this, said he,
was the mightiest battle of warriors wherein he entered. And thirdly he
slew the Amazons, women peers of men. And as he turned back therefrom,
the king devised another cunning wile; he picked from wide Lykia the
bravest men, and set an ambush. But these returned nowise home again;
for noble Bellerophon slew them all. So when the king now knew that he
was the brave offspring of a god, he kept him there, and plighted him
his daughter, and gave him the half of all the honour of his kingdom;
moreover the Lykians meted him a domain preeminent above all, fair with
vineyards and tilth to possess it.** And his wife bare wise Bellerophon
three children, Isandros and Hippolochos and Laodameia. With Laodameia
lay Zeus the lord of counsel, and she bare godlike Sarpedon, the
warrior with arms of bronze. But when even Bellerophon came to be hated
of all the gods, then wandered he alone in the Aleian plain, devouring
his own soul, and avoiding the paths of men; and Isandros his son was
slain by Ares insatiate of battle, as he fought against the famed
Solymi, and his daughter was slain in wrath of gold-gleaming***
Artemis. But Hippolochos begat me, and of him do I declare me to be
sprung; he sent me to Troy and bade me very instantly to be ever the
best and to excel all other men, nor put to shame the lineage of my
fathers that were of noblest blood in Ephyre and in wide Lykia. This is
the lineage and blood whereof I avow myself to be.”

* Or, “for Zeus had brought him [Bellerophon] under his sceptre’s
sway.”


** Or, if we read πυροφόροιο, “tilth of wheat-land.”


*** Or, “Artemis of the golden reins.”


So said he, and Diomedes of the loud war-cry was glad. He planted his
spear in the bounteous earth and with soft words spake to the shepherd
of the host: “Surely then thou art to me a guest-friend of old times
through my father: for goodly Oineus of yore entertained noble
Bellerophon in his halls and kept him twenty days. Moreover they gave
each the other goodly gifts of friendship; Oineus gave a belt bright
with purple, and Bellerophon a gold twy-handled cup, the which when I
came I left in my palace. But of Tydeus I remember naught, seeing I was
yet little when he left me, what time the Achaian host perished at
Thebes. Therefore now am I to thee a dear guest-friend in midmost
Argos, and thou in Lykia, whene’er I fare to your land. So let us shun
each other’s spears, even amid the throng; Trojans are there in
multitudes and famous allies for me to slay, whoe’er it be that God
vouchsafeth me and my feet overtake; and for thee are there Achaians in
multitude, to slay whome’er thou canst. But let us make exchange of
arms between us, that these also may know how we avow ourselves to be
guest-friends by lineage.”

So spake the twain, and leaping from their cars clasped each the other
by his hand, and pledged their faith. But now Zeus son of Kronos took
from Glaukos his wits, in that he made exchange with Diomedes Tydeus’
son of golden armour for bronze, the price of five score oxen for the
price of nine.

Now when Hector came to the Skaian gates and to the oak-tree, there
came running round about him the Trojans’ wives and daughters,
enquiring of sons and brethren and friends and husbands. But he bade
them thereat all in turn pray to the gods; but sorrow hung over many.

But when he came to Priam’s beautiful palace, adorned with polished
colonnades—and in it were fifty chambers of polished stone, builded
hard by one another, wherein Priam’s sons slept beside their wedded
wives; and for his daughters over against them on the other side within
the courtyard were twelve roofed chambers of polished stone builded
hard by one another, wherein slept Priam’s sons-in-law beside their
chaste wives—then came there to meet him his bountiful mother, leading
with her Laodike, fairest of her daughters to look on; and she clasped
her hand in his, and spake, and called upon his name: “My son, why hast
thou left violent battle to come hither? Surely the sons of the
Achaians—name of evil!—press thee hard in fight about thy city, and so
thy spirit hath brought thee hither, to come and stretch forth thy
hands to Zeus from the citadel. But tarry till I bring thee honey-sweet
wine, that thou mayest pour libation to Zeus and all the immortals
first, and then shalt thou thyself also be refreshed if thou wilt
drink. When a man is awearied wine greatly maketh his strength to wax,
even as thou art awearied in fighting for thy fellows.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: “Bring me no
honey-hearted wine, my lady mother, lest thou cripple me of my courage
and I be forgetful of my might.* Moreover I have awe to make libation
of gleaming wine to Zeus with hands unwashen; nor can it be in any wise
that one should pray to the son of Kronos, god of storm-cloud, all
defiled with blood and filth. But go thou to the temple of Athene,
driver of the spoil, with offerings, and gather the aged wives
together; and the robe that seemeth to thee the most gracious and
greatest in thy palace, and dearest unto thyself, that lay thou upon
the knees of beauteous-haired Athene, and vow to her to sacrifice in
her temple twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will
have mercy on the city and the Trojans’ wives and little children. So
may she perchance hold back Tydeus’ son from holy Ilios, the furious
spearman, the mighty deviser of rout. So go thou to the temple of
Athene, driver of the spoil; and I will go after Paris, to summon him,
if perchance he will hearken to my voice. Would that the earth
forthwith might swallow him up! The Olympian fostered him to be a sore
bane to the Trojans and to great-hearted Priam, and to Priam’s sons. If
I but saw him going down to the gates of death, then might I deem that
my heart had forgotten its sorrow.”**

* Omitting δ’ after μένεος, with the best MSS. and probably
Aristarchos. So also Plato, Crat. 415 A.


** Reading with Zenodotos φίλον for φρέν’ ἀτέρπου.


So said he, and she went unto the hall, and called to her handmaidens,
and they gathered the aged wives throughout the city. Then she herself
went down to her fragrant chamber where were her embroidered robes, the
work of Sidonian women, whom godlike Alexandros himself brought from
Sidon, when he sailed over the wide sea, that journey wherein he
brought home high-born Helen. Of these Hekabe took one to bear for an
offering to Athene, the one that was fairest for adornment and
greatest, and shone like a star, and lay nethermost of all. Then went
she her way and the multitude of aged wives hasted after her.

Now when they came to the temple of Athene in the citadel, fair-cheeked
Theano opened them the doors, even Kisseus’ daughter, wife of
horse-taming Antenor; for her the Trojans had made priestess of Athene.
Then lifted they all their hands to Athene with lamentation: and
fair-cheeked Theano took the robe and laid it on the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene, and lifted up her voice and prayed to the
daughter of great Zeus: “Lady Athene, saviour of the city, fair among
goddesses, break now Diomedes’ spear, and grant moreover that himself
may fall prone before the Skaian gates; that we may sacrifice thee now
forthwith in thy temple twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad,
if thou wilt have mercy on the city and the Trojans’ wives and little
children.” So spake she praying, but Pallas Athene denied the prayer.

So were these praying to the daughter of great Zeus; and Hector was
come to Alexandros’ fair palace, that himself had builded with them
that were most excellent carpenters then in deep-soiled Troy-land;
these made him his chamber and hall and courtyard hard by to Priam and
Hector, in the upper city. There entered in Hector dear to Zeus, and
his hand bare his spear, eleven cubits long: before his face glittered
the bronze spear-point, and a ring of gold ran round about it. And he
found Paris in his chamber busied with his beauteous arms, his shield
and breastplate, and handling his curved bow; and Helen of Argos sate
among her serving-women and appointed brave handiwork for her
handmaidens. Then when Hector saw him he rebuked him with scornful
words: “Good sir, thou dost not well to cherish this rancour in thy
heart. The folk are perishing about the city and high wall in battle,
and for thy sake the battle-cry is kindled and war around this city;
yea thyself wouldest thou fall out with another, didst thou see him
shrinking from hateful war. Up then, lest the city soon be scorched
with burning fire.”

And godlike Alexandros answered him: “Hector, since in measure thou
chidest me and not beyond measure, therefore will I tell thee; lay thou
it to thine heart and hearken to me. Not by reason so much of the
Trojans, for wrath and indignation, sate I me in my chamber, but fain
would I yield me to my sorrow. Even now my wife hath persuaded me with
soft words, and urged me into battle; and I moreover, even I, deem that
it will be better so; for victory shifteth from man to man. Go to then,
tarry awhile, let me put on my armour of war; or else fare thou forth,
and I will follow; and I think to overtake thee.”

So said he, but Hector of the glancing helm answered him not a word.
But Helen spake to him with gentle words: “My brother, even mine that
am a dog, mischievous and abominable, would that on the day when my
mother bare me at the first, an evil storm-wind had caught me away to a
mountain or a billow of the loud-sounding sea, where the billow might
have swept me away before all these things came to pass. Howbeit,
seeing the gods devised all these ills in this wise, would that then I
had been mated with a better man, that felt dishonour and the multitude
of men’s reproachings. But as for him, neither hath he now sound heart,
nor ever will have; thereof deem I moreover that he will reap the
fruit. But now come, enter in and sit thee here upon this bench, my
brother, since thy heart chiefly trouble hath encompassed, for the sake
of me, that am a dog, and for Alexandros’ sin; on whom Zeus bringeth
evil doom, that even in days to come we may be a song in the ears of
men that shall be hereafter.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: “Bid me not sit,
Helen, of thy love; thou wilt not persuade me. Already my heart is set
to succour the men of Troy, that have great desire for me that am not
with them. But rouse thou this fellow, yea let himself make speed, to
overtake me yet within the city. For I shall go into mine house to
behold my housefolk and my dear wife, and infant boy; for I know not if
I shall return home to them again, or if the gods will now overthrow me
at the hands of the Achaians.”

So spake Hector of the glancing helm and departed; and anon he came to
his well stablished house. But he found not white-armed Andromache in
the halls; she with her boy and fair-robed handmaiden had taken her
stand upon the tower, weeping and wailing. And when Hector found not
his noble wife within, he came and stood upon the threshold and spake
amid the serving women: “Come tell me now true, my serving women.
Whither went white-armed Andromache forth from the hall? Hath she gone
out to my sisters or unto my brothers’ fair-robed wives, or to Athene’s
temple, where all the fair-tressed Trojan women propitiate the awful
goddess?”

Then a busy housedame spake in answer to him: “Hector, seeing thou
straitly chargest us tell thee true, neither hath she gone out to any
of thy sisters or thy brothers’ fair-robed wives, neither to Athene’s
temple, where all the fair-tressed Trojan women are propitiating the
awful goddess; but she went to the great tower of Ilios, because she
heard the Trojans were hard pressed, and great victory was for the
Achaians. So hath she come in haste to the wall, like unto one
frenzied; and the nurse with her beareth the child.”

So spake the housedame, and Hector hastened from his house back by the
same way down the well-builded streets. When he had passed through the
great city and was come to the Skaian gates, whereby he was minded to
issue upon the plain, then came his dear-won* wife, running to meet
him, even Andromache daughter of great-hearted Eëtion, Eëtion that
dwelt beneath wooded Plakos, in Thebe under Plakos, and was king of the
men of Kilikia; for his daughter was wife to bronze-harnessed Hector.
So she met him now, and with her went the handmaid bearing in her bosom
the tender boy, the little child, Hector’s loved son, like unto a
beautiful star. Him Hector called Skamandrios, but all the folk
Astyanax; for only Hector guarded Ilios.** So now he smiled and gazed
at his boy silently, and Andromache stood by his side weeping, and
clasped her hand in his, and spake and called upon his name. “Dear my
lord, this thy hardihood will undo thee, neither hast thou any pity for
thine infant boy, nor for me forlorn that soon shall be thy widow; for
soon will the Achaians all set upon thee and slay thee. But it were
better for me to go down to the grave if I lose thee; for never more
will any comfort be mine, when once thou, even thou, hast met thy fate,
but only sorrow. Moreover I have no father nor lady mother: my father
was slain of goodly Achilles, for he wasted the populous city of the
Kilikians, even high-gated Thebe, and slew Eëtion; yet he despoiled him
not, for his soul had shame of that, but he burnt him in his inlaid
armour and raised a barrow over him; and all about were elm-trees
planted by the mountain nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus. And
the seven brothers that were mine within our halls, all these on the
selfsame day went within the house of Hades; for fleet-footed goodly
Achilles slew them all amid their kine of trailing gait and
white-fleeced sheep. And my mother, that was queen beneath wooded
Plakos, her brought he hither with the other spoils, but afterward took
a ransom untold to set her free; but in her father’s halls was she
smitten by the Archer Artemis. Nay, Hector, thou art to me father and
lady mother, yea and brother, even as thou art my goodly husband. Come
now, have pity and abide here upon the tower, lest thou make thy child
an orphan and thy wife a widow. And stay thy folk beside the fig-tree,
where best the city may be scaled and the wall is assailable. Thrice
came thither the most valiant that are with the two Aiantes and famed
Idomeneus and the sons of Atreus and Tydeus’ valiant son, and essayed
to enter; whether one skilled in soothsaying revealed it to them, or
whether their own spirit urgeth and biddeth them on.”

* Or, “bounteous.”


** Astyanax = “City King.”


Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: “Surely I take
thought for all these things, my wife; but I have very sore shame of
the Trojans and Trojan dames with trailing robes, if like a coward I
shrink away from battle. Moreover mine own soul forbiddeth me, seeing I
have learnt ever to be valiant and fight in the forefront of the
Trojans, winning my father’s great glory and mine own. Yea of a surety
I know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy Ilios to be
laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear. Yet
doth the anguish of the Trojans hereafter not so much trouble me,
neither Hekabe’s own, neither king Priam’s, neither my brethren’s, the
many and brave that shall fall in the dust before their foemen, as doth
thine anguish in the day when some mail-clad Achaian shall lead thee
weeping and rob thee of the light of freedom. So shalt thou abide in
Argos and ply the loom at another woman’s bidding, and bear water from
fount Messeis or Hypereia, being grievously entreated, and sore
constraint shall be laid upon thee. And then shall one say that
beholdeth thee weep: ‘This is the wife of Hector, that was foremost in
battle of the horse-taming Trojans when men fought about Ilios.’ Thus
shall one say hereafter, and fresh grief will be thine for lack of such
an husband as thou hadst to ward off the day of thraldom. But me in
death may the heaped-up earth be covering, ere I hear thy crying and
thy carrying into captivity.”

So spake glorious Hector, and stretched out his arm to his boy. But the
child shrunk crying to the bosom of his fair-girdled nurse, dismayed at
his dear father’s aspect, and in dread at the bronze and horse-hair
crest that he beheld nodding fiercely from the helmet’s top. Then his
dear father laughed aloud, and his lady mother; forthwith glorious
Hector took the helmet from his head, and laid it, all gleaming, upon
the earth; then kissed he his dear son and dandled him in his arms, and
spake in prayer to Zeus and all the gods, “O Zeus and all ye gods,
vouchsafe ye that this my son may likewise prove even as I, pre-eminent
amid the Trojans, and as valiant in might, and be a great king of
Ilios. Then may men say of him, ‘Far greater is he than his father’ as
he returneth home from battle; and may he bring with him blood-stained
spoils from the foeman he hath slain, and may his mother’s heart be
glad.”

So spake he, and laid his son in his dear wife’s arms; and she took him
to her fragrant bosom, smiling tearfully. And her husband had pity to
see her, and caressed her with his hand, and spake and called upon her
name: “Dear one, I pray thee be not of oversorrowful heart; no man
against my fate shall hurl me to Hades; only destiny, I ween, no man
hath escaped, be he coward or be he valiant, when once he hath been
born. But go thou to thine house and see to thine own tasks, the loom
and distaff, and bid thine handmaidens ply their work; but for war
shall men provide, and I in chief of all men that dwell in Ilios.”

So spake glorious Hector, and took up his horse-hair crested helmet;
and his dear wife departed to her home, oft looking back, and letting
fall big tears. Anon she came to the well-stablished house of
man-slaying Hector, and found therein her many handmaidens, and stirred
lamentation in them all. So bewailed they Hector, while yet he lived,
within his house: for they deemed that he would no more come back to
them from battle, nor escape the fury of the hands of the Achaians.

Neither lingered Paris long in his lofty house, but clothed on him his
brave armour, bedight with bronze, and hasted through the city,
trusting to his nimble feet. Even as when a stalled horse, full-fed at
the manger, breaketh his tether and speedeth at the gallop across the
plain, being wont to bathe him in the fair-flowing stream, exultingly;
and holdeth his head on high, and his mane floateth about his
shoulders, and he trusteth in his glory, and nimbly his limbs bear him
to the haunts and pasturages of mares; even so Priam’s son Paris,
glittering in his armour like the shining sun, strode down from high
Pergamos laughingly, and his swift feet bare him. Forthwith he overtook
his brother noble Hector, even as he was on the point to turn him away
from the spot where he had dallied with his wife. To him first spake
godlike Alexandros: “Sir, in good sooth I have delayed thee in thine
haste by my tarrying, and came not rightly as thou badest me.”

And Hector of the glancing helm answered him and said: “Good brother,
no man that is rightminded could make light of thy doings in fight,
seeing thou art strong: but thou art wilfully remiss and hast no care;
and for this my heart is grieved within me, that I hear shameful words
concerning thee in the Trojans’ mouths, who for thy sake endure much
toil. But let us be going; all this will we make good hereafter, if
Zeus ever vouchsafe us to set before the heavenly gods that are for
everlasting the cup of deliverance in our halls, when we have chased
out of Troy-land the well-greaved Achaians.”




BOOK VII.


Of the single combat between Aias and Hector, and of the burying of the
dead, and the building of a wall about the Achaian ships.


So spake glorious Hector and issued from the gates, and with him went
his brother Alexandros; and both were eager of soul for fight and
battle. Even as God giveth to longing seamen fair wind when they have
grown weary of beating the main with polished oars, and their limbs are
fordone with toil, even so appeared these to the longing Trojans.

Then the one of them slew king Areïthoös’ son, Menesthios dwelling in
Arne, whom Areïthoös the Mace-man and ox-eyed Phylomedusa begat; and
the other, even Hector, with his sharp spear smote Eïoneus’ neck
beneath his bronze helmet-rim, and unstrung his limbs. And Glaukos son
of Hippolochos, captain of the men of Lykia, cast his spear at Iphinoos
through the press of battle, even at the son of Dexios, as he sprang up
behind his fleet mares, and smote his shoulder; so fell he from his
chariot to earth and his limbs were unstrung.

Now when the goddess bright-eyed Athene marked them making havoc of the
Argives in the press of battle, she darted down from the crests of
Olympus to holy Ilios. But Apollo rose to meet her, for he beheld her
from Pergamos, and would have victory for the Trojans. So the twain met
each the other by the oak-tree. To her spake first king Apollo son of
Zeus: “Why now art thou come thus eagerly from Olympus, thou daughter
of great Zeus, and why hath thy high heart sent thee? Surely it is to
give the Danaans unequal victory in battle! seeing thou hast no mercy
on the Trojans, that perish. But if thou wouldest hearken to me—and it
were far better so—let us now stay battle and warring for the day;
hereafter shall they fight again, till they reach the goal of Ilios,
since thus it seemeth good to your hearts, goddesses immortal, to lay
waste this city.”

And the goddess bright-eyed Athene made answer to him: “So be it,
Far-darter; in this mind I likewise came from Olympus to the midst of
Trojans and Achaians. But come, how thinkest thou to stay the battle of
the warriors?”

And king Apollo, son of Zeus, made answer to her: “Let us arouse the
stalwart spirit of horse-taming Hector, if so be he will challenge some
one of the Danaans in single fight man to man to meet him in deadly
combat. So shall the bronze-greaved Achaians be jealous and stir up one
to fight singly with goodly Hector.”

So spake he and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not. Now
Helenos Priam’s dear son understood in spirit their resolve that the
gods in counsel had approved; and he went to Hector and stood beside
him, and spake a word to him: “Hector son of Priam, peer of Zeus in
counsel, wouldest thou now hearken at all to me? for I am thy brother.
Make the other Trojans sit, and all the Achaians, and thyself challenge
him that is best of the Achaians to meet thee man to man in deadly
combat. It is not yet thy destiny to die and meet thy doom; for thus
heard I the voice of the gods that are from everlasting.”

So said he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his saying, and went
into the midst and refrained the battalions of the Trojans with his
spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down: and Agamemnon
made the well-greaved Achaians sit. And Athene withal and Apollo of the
silver bow, in the likeness of vulture birds, sate them upon a tall oak
holy to aegis-bearing father Zeus, rejoicing in their warriors; and the
ranks of all of them sate close together, bristling with shields and
plumes and spears. Even as there spreadeth across the main the ripple
of the west wind newly risen, and the sea grows black beneath it, so
sate the ranks of Achaians and Trojans upon the plain. And Hector spake
between both hosts: “Hearken to me, Trojans and well-greaved Achaians,
that I may speak what my mind within my breast biddeth me. Our oaths of
truce Kronos’ son, enthroned on high, accomplished not; but evil is his
intent and ordinance for both our hosts, until either ye take
fair-towered Troy or yourselves be vanquished beside your seafaring
ships. But in the midst of you are the chiefest of all the Achaians;
therefore now let the man whose heart biddeth him fight with me come
hither from among you all to be your champion against goodly Hector.
And this declare I, and be Zeus our witness thereto; if that man slay
me with the long-edged sword, let him spoil me of my armour and bear it
to the hollow ships, but give back my body to my home, that Trojans and
Trojans’ wives may give me my due of burning in my death. But if I slay
him and Apollo vouchsafe me glory, I will spoil him of his armour and
bear it to holy Ilios and hang it upon the temple of far-darting
Apollo, but his corpse will I render back to the well-decked ships,
that the flowing-haired Achaians may entomb him, and build him a barrow
beside wide Hellespont. So shall one say even of men that be late born,
as he saileth in his benched ship over the wine-dark sea: ‘This is the
barrow of a man that died in days of old, a champion whom glorious
Hector slew.’ So shall a man say hereafter, and this my glory shall
never die.”

So spake he and they all were silent and held their peace; to deny him
they were ashamed, and feared to meet him. But at the last stood up
Menelaos and spake amid them and chiding upbraided them, and groaned
deep at heart: “Ah me, vain threateners, ye women of Achaia and no more
men, surely all this shall be a shame, evil of evil, if no one of the
Danaans now goeth to meet Hector. Nay, turn ye all to earth and water,
sitting there each man disheartened, helplessly inglorious; against him
will I myself array me; and from on high the threads of victory are
guided of the immortal gods.”

So spake he and donned his fair armour. And now, O Menelaos, had the
end of life appeared for thee at Hector’s hands, seeing he was stronger
far, but that the princes of the Achaians started up and caught thee.
And Atreus’ son himself, wide-ruling Agamemnon, took him by his right
hand and spake a word and called upon his name: “Thou doest madly,
Menelaos fosterling of Zeus; yet is it no time for this thy madness.
Draw back, though it be with pain, nor think for contention’s sake to
fight with one better than thou, with Hector Priam’s son, whom others
beside thee abhor. Yea, this man even Achilles dreadeth to meet in
battle, wherein is the warrior’s glory; and Achilles is better far than
thou. Go therefore now and sit amid the company of thy fellows; against
him shall the Achaians put forth another champion. Fearless though he
be and insatiate of turmoil, I ween that he shall be fain to rest his
knees, if he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray.”

So spake the hero and persuaded his brother’s heart with just counsel;
and he obeyed. So his squires thereat with gladness took his armour
from his shoulders; and Nestor stood up and spake amid the Argives:
“Fie upon it, verily sore lamentation cometh on the land of Achaia.
Verily old Peleus driver of chariots would groan sore, that goodly
counsellor of the Myrmidons and orator, who erst questioned me in his
house, and rejoiced greatly, inquiring of the lineage and birth of all
the Argives. If he heard now of those that all were cowering before
Hector, then would he lift his hands to the immortals, instantly
praying that his soul might depart from his limbs down to the house of
Hades. Ah would to father Zeus and Athene and Apollo I were young as
when beside swift-flowing Keladon the Pylians gathered together to
battle and the Arkadians that bear the spear, beneath the walls of
Pheia, about the streams of Iardanos. Then stood up for their champion
Ereuthalion, a man the peer of gods, bearing upon his shoulders the
armour of king Areïthoös, goodly Areïthoös that by men and fair-girdled
women was surnamed the Mace-man, because he fought not with bow and
long spear, but with an iron mace clave the battalions. Him Lykurgos
slew by guile, and not by strength, in a narrow way, where his mace of
iron saved him not from destruction: ere that, Lykurgos came on him
unawares and pierced him through the midst with his dart, and he was
hurled backward upon the earth. Then Lykurgos despoiled him of his arms
that brazen Ares had given him; and these himself he bare thereafter
into the mellay of war. But when Lykurgos grew old within his halls he
gave them to Ereuthalion his dear squire to wear. So with his arms upon
him he challenged all our best; but they trembled sore and were afraid,
and no man took heart. But me my hardy spirit aroused to meet him in my
confidence;* yet was I youngest in years of all. So fought I with him
and Athene vouchsafed me glory. Tallest was he and strongest of men
that I have slain; as one of huge bulk he lay spread this way and that.
Would to God I were thus young and my strength were sound; then would
Hector of the glancing helm soon find his combat. But of those of you
that be chieftains of the host of the Achaians, yet desireth no man of
good heart to meet Hector face to face.”

* Or, “to meet his might,” according to the usual interpretation of ᾦ.


So the old man upbraided them, and there stood up nine in all. Far
first arose Agamemnon king of men, and after him rose Tydeus’ son
stalwart Diomedes, and after them the Aiantes clothed with impetuous
might, and after them Idomeneus and Idomeneus’ brother-in-arms
Meriones, peer of Enyalios slayer of men, and after them Eurypylos
Euaimon’s glorious son; and up rose Thoas Andraimon’s son and goodly
Odysseus. So all these were fain to fight with goodly Hector. And among
them spake again knightly Nestor of Gerenia: “Now cast ye the lot from
the first unto the last, for him that shall be chosen; for he shall in
truth profit the well-greaved Achaians, yea and he shall have profit of
his own soul, if he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray.”

So said he, and they marked each man his lot and cast them in the
helmet of Agamemnon Atreus’ son; and the hosts prayed and lifted up
their hands to the gods. And thus would one say, looking up to wide
heaven: “O father Zeus, vouchsafe that the lot fall upon Aias or
Tydeus’ son, or else on the king of Mykene rich in gold.”

So spake they, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia shook the helmet, and
there leapt forth the lot that themselves desired, even the lot of
Aias. The herald bare it everywhither through the throng, shewing it
from right to left to all the princes of the Achaians; but they knew it
not, and every man denied it. But when he came, bearing it everywhither
through the throng, to him that had marked it and cast it in the helm,
even glorious Aias, then he held forth his hand, and the herald stood
by him and put it therein. And Aias saw and knew the token upon the
lot, and rejoiced in heart. He cast it by his foot upon the earth, and
spake: “My friends, verily the lot is mine, yea and myself am glad at
heart, because I deem that I shall vanquish goodly Hector. But come
now, while I clothe me in my armour of battle, pray ye the while to
Kronos’ son king Zeus, in silence to yourselves, that the Trojans hear
you not—nay rather, openly if ye will, for we have no fear of any man
soever. For none by force shall chase me, he willing me unwilling,
neither by skill; seeing I hope that not so skill-less, either, was I
born in Salamis nor nurtured.”

So said he, and they prayed to Kronos’ son, king Zeus; and thus would
one speak, looking up to wide heaven: “O father Zeus that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great, vouchsafe to Aias victory and the
winning of great glory. But if thou so lovest Hector indeed, and carest
for him, grant unto either equal prowess and renown.”

So said they, while Aias arrayed him in flashing bronze. And when he
had now clothed upon his flesh all his armour, then marched he as huge
Ares coming forth, when he goeth to battle amid heroes whom Kronos’ son
setteth to fight in fury of heart-consuming strife. So rose up huge
Aias, bulwark of the Achaians, with a smile on his grim face: and went
with long strides of his feet beneath him, shaking his far-shadowing
spear. Then moreover the Argives rejoiced to look upon him, but sore
trembling came upon the Trojans, on the limbs of every man, and
Hector’s own heart beat within his breast. But in no wise could he now
flee nor shrink back into the throng of the host, seeing he had
challenged him to battle. And Aias came near bearing his tower-like
shield of bronze, with sevenfold ox-hide, that Tychios had wrought him
cunningly; Tychios far best of curriers, that had his home in Hyle, who
made him his glancing shield, of sevenfold hides of stalwart bulls, and
overlaid the seven with bronze. This bare Telamonian Aias before his
breast, and stood near to Hector, and spake to him threatening:
“Hector, now verily shalt thou well know, man to man, what manner of
princes the Danaans likewise have among them, even after Achilles,
render of men, the lion-hearted. But he amid his beaked seafaring ships
lieth in sore wrath with Agamemnon shepherd of the host; yet are we
such as to face thee, yea and many of us. But make thou beginning of
war and battle.”

And great Hector of the glancing helm answered him: “Aias of the seed
of Zeus, son of Telamon, chieftain of the host, tempt not thou me like
some puny boy or woman that knoweth not deeds of battle. But I well
know wars and slaughterings. To right know I, to left know I the
wielding of my tough targe; therein I deem is stalwart soldiership. And
I know how to charge into the mellay of fleet chariots, and how in
close battle to join in furious Ares’ dance. Howbeit, I have no mind to
smite thee, being such an one as thou art, by spying thee unawares; but
rather openly, if perchance I may hit thee.”

He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled and smote
Aias’ dread shield of sevenfold hide upon the uttermost bronze, the
eighth layer that was thereon. Through six folds went the stubborn
bronze cleaving, but in the seventh hide it stayed. Then heaven-sprung
Aias hurled next his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the circle of
the shield of Priam’s son. Through the bright shield passed the violent
spear, and through the curiously wrought corslet pressed it on; and
straight forth beside the flank the spear rent his doublet; but he
swerved aside and escaped black death. Then both together with their
hands plucked forth their long spears and fell to like ravening lions
or wild boars whose might is nowise feeble. Then Priam’s son smote the
shield’s midst with his dart, but the bronze brake not through, for the
point turned back; but Aias leapt on him and pierced his buckler, and
straight through went the spear and staggered him in his onset, and
cleft its way unto his neck, so that the dark blood gushed up. Yet even
then did not Hector of the glancing helm cease from fight, but yielded
ground and with stout hand seized a stone lying upon the plain, black
and rugged and great; therewith hurled he and smote Aias’ dread shield
of sevenfold ox-hide in the midst upon the boss, and the bronze
resounded. Next Aias lifted a far greater stone, and swung and hurled
it, putting might immeasurable therein. So smote he the buckler and
burst it inwards with the rock like unto a millstone, and beat down his
knees; and he was stretched upon his back, pressed into his shield; but
Apollo straightway raised him up. And now had they been smiting hand to
hand with swords, but that the heralds, messengers of gods and men,
came, one from the Trojans, one from the mail-clad Achaians, even
Talthybios and Idaios, both men discreet. Between the two held they
their staves, and herald Idaios spake a word, being skilled in wise
counsel: “Fight ye no more, dear sons, neither do battle; seeing Zeus
the cloud-gatherer loveth you both, and both are men of war; that
verily know we all. But night already is upon us: it is well withal to
obey the hest of night.”

Then Telamonian Aias answered and said to him: “Idaios, bid ye Hector
to speak those words; of his own self he challenged to combat all our
best. Let him be first, and I will surely follow as he saith.”

Then great Hector of the glancing helm said to him: “Aias, seeing God
gave thee stature and might and wisdom, and with the spear thou art
excellent above all the Achaians, let us now cease from combat and
battle for the day; but hereafter will we fight until God judge between
us, giving to one of us the victory. But night already is upon us; it
is well withal to obey the hest of night; that so thou mayest rejoice
all the Achaians beside their ships, and chiefly the kinsmen and
fellows that are thine; and I throughout the great city of king Priam
will rejoice the Trojan men and Trojan dames with trailing robes, that
with prayer I ween will enter the holy assemblage. But come, let us
give each the other famous gifts, that men may thus say, Achaians alike
and Trojans: ‘These, having fought for sake of heart-consuming strife,
parted again reconciled in friendship.’”

So said he, and gave him his silver-studded sword, with scabbard and
well-cut baldrick; and Aias gave his belt bright with purple. So they
parted, and one went to the Achaian host, and one betook him to the
throng of Trojans. And these rejoiced to behold him come to them alive
and sound, escaped from the fury of Aias and his hands unapproachable;
and they brought him to the city saved beyond their hope. And Aias on
their side the well-greaved Achaians brought to noble Agamemnon,
exulting in his victory.

So when these were come unto the huts of Atreides, then did Agamemnon
king of men slay them an ox, a male of five years old, for the most
mighty son of Kronos. This they flayed and made ready, and divided it
all, and minced it cunningly, and pierced it through with spits, and
roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. Then as soon as they had
rest from the task and had made ready the meal, they began the feast,
nor was their soul aught stinted of the equal banquet. And the hero son
of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, gave to Aias slices of the chine’s
full length for his honour. And when they had put from them the desire
of meat and drink, then first the old man began to weave the web of
counsel, even Nestor whose rede of old time was proved most excellent.
He of good intent made harangue among them and said: “Son of Atreus and
ye other princes of the Achaians, seeing that many flowing-haired
Achaians are dead, and keen Ares hath spilt their dusky blood about
fair-flowing Skamandros, and their souls have gone down to the house of
Hades; therefore it behoveth thee to make the battle of the Achaians
cease with daybreak; and we will assemble to wheel hither the corpses
with oxen and mules; so let us burn them [a little way from the ships,
that each man may bear their bones home to their children, whene’er we
return again to our native land]; and let us heap one barrow about the
pyre, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and thereto build with
speed high towers, a bulwark for our ships and for ourselves. In the
midst thereof let us make gates well compact, that through them may be
a way for chariot-driving. And without let us dig a deep foss hard by,
to be about it and to hinder horses and footmen, lest the battle of the
lordly Trojans be heavy on us hereafter.”

So spake he and all the chiefs gave assent. But meanwhile there was in
the high town of Ilios an assembly of the Trojans, fierce, confused,
beside Priam’s gate. To them discreet Antenor began to make harangue:
“Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may tell you
that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Lo, go to now, let us give
Helen of Argos and the wealth with her for the sons of Atreus to take
away. Now fight we in guilt against the oaths of faith; therefore is
there no profit for us that I hope to see fulfilled, unless we do
thus.”

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them noble
Alexandros, lord of Helen beautiful-haired; he made him answer and
spake winged words: “Antenor, these words from thee are no longer to my
pleasure; yet thou hast it in thee to devise other sayings more
excellent than this. But if indeed thou sayest this in earnest, then
verily the gods themselves have destroyed thy wit. But I will speak
forth amid the horse-taming Trojans, and declare outright; my wife will
I not give back; but the wealth I brought from Argos to our home, all
that I have a mind to give, and add more of mine own substance.”

So spake he and sate him down, and there stood up among them Priam of
the seed of Dardanos, the peer of gods in counsel; he made harangue to
them, and said: “Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that
I may tell you that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Now eat
your supper throughout the city as of old, and take thought to keep
watch, and be wakeful every man. And at dawn let Idaios fare to the
hollow ships to tell to Atreus’ sons Agamemnon and Menelaos the saying
of Alexandros, for whose sake strife is come about: and likewise to ask
them this wise word, whether they are minded to refrain from noisy war
till we have burned our dead; afterwards will we fight again, till
heaven part us and give one or other victory.”

So spake he, and they hearkened diligently to him and obeyed; [then
took they their supper throughout the host by ranks,] and at dawn
Idaios fared to the hollow ships. He found the Danaans in assembly, the
men of Ares’ company, beside the stern of Agamemnon’s ship; and so the
loud-voiced herald stood in their midst and said unto them: “Atreides
and ye other princes of the Achaians, Priam and all the noble Trojans
bade me tell you—if perchance it might find favour and acceptance with
you—the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife hath come about.
The wealth that Alexandros brought in his hollow ships to Troy—would he
had perished first!—all that he hath a mind to give, and to add more
thereto of his substance. But the wedded wife of glorious Menelaos he
saith he will not give; yet verily the Trojans bid him do it. Moreover
they bade me ask this thing of you; whether ye are minded to refrain
from noisy war until we have burned our dead; afterwards will we fight
again, till heaven part us and give one or other victory.”

So said he and they all kept silence and were still. But at the last
spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry in their midst: “Let no man now
accept Alexandros’ substance, neither Helen’s self; known is it, even
to him that hath no wit at all, how that the issues of destruction hang
already over the Trojans.”

So spake he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted, applauding the
saying of horse-taming Diomedes. And then lord Agamemnon spake to
Idaios: “Idaios, thyself thou hearest the saying of the Achaians, how
they answer thee; and the like seemeth good to me. But as concerning
the dead, I grudge you not to burn them; for dead corpses is there no
stinting; when they once are dead, of the swift propitiation of fire.
And for the oaths let Zeus be witness, the loud-thundering lord of
Hera.”

So saying he lifted up his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
Idaios departed back to holy Ilios. Now Trojans and Dardanians sate in
assembly, gathered all together to wait till Idaios should come; and he
came and stood in their midst and declared his message. Then they made
them ready very swiftly for either task, some to bring the dead, and
some to seek for wood. And on their part the Argives hasted from their
well-decked ships, some to bring the dead and some to seek for wood.

Now the sun was newly beating on the fields as he climbed heaven from
the deep stream of gently-flowing Ocean, when both sides met together.
Then was it a hard matter to know each man again; but they washed them
with water clean of clotted gore, and with shedding of hot tears lifted
them upon the wains. But great Priam bade them not wail aloud; so in
silence heaped they the corpses on the pyre, stricken at heart; and
when they had burned them with fire departed to holy Ilios. And in like
manner on their side the well-greaved Achaians heaped the corpses on
the pyre, stricken at heart, and when they had burned them with fire
departed to the hollow ships.

And when day was not yet, but still twilight of night, then was the
chosen folk of the Achaians gathered together* around the pyre, and
made one barrow about it, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and
thereto built they a wall and lofty towers, a bulwark for their ships
and for themselves. In the midst thereof made they gates
well-compacted, that through them might be a way for chariot-driving.
And without they dug a deep foss beside it, broad and great, and
planted a palisade therein.

Reading ἤγρετο for ἔγρετο.


Thus toiled the flowing-haired Achaians: and the gods sate by Zeus, the
lord of lightning, and marvelled at the great work of the mail-clad
Achaians. And Poseidon shaker of earth spake first to them: “O father
Zeus, is there any man throughout the boundless earth that will any
more declare to the immortals his mind and counsel? Seest thou not how
the flowing-haired Achaians have now again built them a wall before
their ships, and drawn a foss around it, but gave not excellent
hecatombs to the gods? Verily the fame thereof shall reach as far as
the dawn spreadeth, and men will forget the wall that I and Phoebus
Apollo built with travail for the hero Laomedon.”

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer said to him, sore troubled: “Out on it,
far-swaying Shaker of earth, for this thing thou sayest. Well might
some other god fear this device, one that were far feebler than thou in
the might of his hands: but thine shall be the fame as far as the dawn
spreadeth. Go to now, hereafter when the flowing-haired Achaians be
departed upon their ships to their dear native land, then burst thou
this wall asunder and scatter it all into the sea, and cover the great
sea-beach over with sand again, that the great wall of the Achaians be
brought to naught.”

Such converse held these one with the other, and the sun went down, and
the work of the Achaians was accomplished; and they slaughtered oxen
amid the huts, and took supper. And many ships from Lemnos, bearing
wine, were at hand, sent of Jason’s son Euneos, whom Hypsipyle bare to
Jason shepherd of the host. And specially for Atreus’ sons, Agamemnon
and Menelaos, Jason’s son gave a freight of wine, even a thousand
measures. So the flowing-haired Achaians bought them wine thence, some
for bronze and some for gleaming iron, and some with hides and some
with whole kine, and some with captives; and they set a rich feast
before them. Then all night long feasted the flowing-haired Achaians,
and in the city the Trojans and allies; and all night long Zeus the
lord of counsel devised them ill with terrible thunderings. Then pale
fear gat hold upon them, and they spilt wine from their cups upon the
earth, neither durst any drink till he had made libation to most mighty
Kronion. Then laid they them to rest and took the boon of sleep.




BOOK VIII.


How Zeus bethought him of his promise to avenge Achilles’ wrong on
Agamemnon: and therefore bade the gods refrain from war, and gave
victory to the Trojans.


Now Dawn the saffron-robed was spreading over all the earth, and Zeus
whose joy is in the thunder let call an assembly of the gods upon the
topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus, and himself made harangue to them
and all the gods gave ear: “Hearken to me, all gods and all ye
goddesses, that I may tell you what my heart within my breast
commandeth me. One thing let none essay, be it goddess or be it god, to
wit, to thwart my saying; approve ye it all together, that with all
speed I may accomplish these things. Whomsoever I shall perceive minded
to go, apart from the gods, to succour Trojans or Danaans, chastened in
no seemly wise shall he return to Olympus, or I will take and cast him
into misty Tartaros, right far away, where is the deepest gulf beneath
the earth; there are the gate of iron and threshold of bronze, as far
beneath Hades as heaven is high above the earth: then shall he know how
far I am mightiest of all gods. Go to now, ye gods, make trial that ye
all may know. Fasten ye a rope of gold from heaven, and all ye gods lay
hold thereof and all goddesses; yet could ye not drag from heaven to
earth Zeus, counsellor supreme, not though ye toiled sore. But once I
likewise were minded to draw with all my heart, then should I draw you
up with very earth and sea withal. Thereafter would I bind the rope
about a pinnacle of Olympus, and so should all those things be hung in
air. By so much am I beyond gods and beyond men.”

So said he, and they all kept silence and were still, marvelling at his
saying; for he spake very masterfully. But at the last there spake to
them the bright-eyed goddess Athene: “O our father Kronides, supreme of
lords, well we know, even we, that thy might is unyielding; yet still
have we pity for the Danaan spearmen, that now shall perish and fulfil
a grievous fate. Yet will we refrain from battle as thou biddest us,
but counsel will we offer to the Argives for their profit, that they
perish not all at thy wrath.”

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer smiled at her and said: “Be of good
comfort, dear child, Trito-born; I speak not at all of earnest purpose,
but I am minded to be kindly to thee”

So saying he let harness to his chariot his bronze-shod horses, fleet
of foot, with flowing manes of gold; and himself clad him with gold
upon his flesh, and grasped the whip of gold, well-wrought, and mounted
upon his car, and lashed the horses to start them; they nothing loth
sped on between earth and starry heaven. So fared he to many-fountained
Ida, mother of wild beasts, even unto Gargaros, where is his demesne
and fragrant altar. There did the father of men and gods stay his
horses, and unloose them from the car, and cast thick mist about them;
and himself sate on the mountain-tops rejoicing in his glory, to behold
the city of the Trojans and ships of the Achaians.

Now the flowing-haired Achaians took meat hastily among the huts and
thereafter arrayed themselves. Likewise the Trojans on their side armed
them throughout the town—a smaller host, yet for all that were they
eager to fight in battle, of forceful need, for their children’s sake
and their wives’. And the gates were opened wide and the host issued
forth, footmen and horsemen; and mighty din arose.

So when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed
they targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed
shields pressed each on each, and mighty din arose. Then were heard the
voice of groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and
the slain, and the earth streamed with blood.

Now while it yet was morn and the divine day waxed, so long from either
side lighted the darts amain and the people fell. But when the sun
bestrode mid-heaven, then did the Father balance his golden scales, and
put therein two fates of death that layeth men at their length,* one
for horse-taming Trojans, one for mail-clad Achaians; and he took the
scale-yard by the midst and lifted it, and the Achaians’ day of destiny
sank down. So lay the Achaians’ fates on the bounteous earth, and the
Trojans’ fates were lifted up towards wide heaven. And the god
thundered aloud from Ida, and sent his blazing flash amid the host of
the Achaians; and they saw and were astonished, and pale fear gat hold
upon all.

* Perhaps rather “death that bringeth long woe.”


Then had Idomeneus no heart to stand, neither Agamemnon, neither stood
the twain Aiantes, men of Ares’ company. Only Nestor of Gerenia stood
his ground, he the Warden of the Achaians; neither he of purpose, but
his horse was fordone, which noble Alexandros, beauteous-haired Helen’s
lord, had smitten with an arrow upon the top of the crest where the
foremost hairs of horses grow upon the skull; and there is the most
deadly spot. So the horse leapt up in anguish and the arrow sank into
his brain, and he brought confusion on the steeds as he writhed upon
the dart. While the old man leapt forth and with his sword began to hew
the traces, came Hector’s fleet horses through the tumult, bearing a
bold charioteer, even Hecktor. And now had the old man lost his life,
but that Diomedes of the loud war-cry was swift to mark. Terribly
shouted he, summoning Odysseus: “Heaven-born son of Laertes, Odysseus
of many wiles, whither fleest thou with thy back turned, like a coward
in the throng? Beware lest as thou fleest one plant a spear between thy
shoulders. Nay, stand thy ground, till we thrust back from the old man
his furious foe.”

So spake he, but much-enduring noble Odysseus heard him not, but
hastened by to the hollow ships of the Achaians. Yet Tydeides, though
but one, mingled amid the fighters in the forefront, and took his stand
before the steeds of the old man, Neleus’ son, and spake to him winged
words, and said: “Old man, of a truth young warriors beset thee hard;
and thy force is abated, and old age is sore upon thee, and thy squire
is but a weakling, and thy steeds are slow. Come then, mount upon my
car, that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or fleeing hither or thither very fleetly across
the plain, even those that erst I took from Aineias inspirer of fear.*
Thine let our squires tend, and these let us guide straight against the
horse-taming Trojans, that even Hector may know whether my spear also
rageth in my hands.”

* Reading μήστωρα. See Book V. 272.


So said he, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia disregarded not. Then the
two squires tended Nestor’s horses, even Sthenelos the valiant and
kindly Eurymedon: and the other twain both mounted upon Diomedes’ car.
And Nestor took into his hands the shining reins, and lashed the
horses; and soon they drew nigh Hector. Then Tydeus’ son hurled at him
as he charged straight upon them: him missed he, but his squire that
drave his chariot, Eniopeus, high-hearted Thebaios’ son, even him as he
held the reins, he smote upon the breast beside the nipple. So he fell
from out the car, and his fleet-footed horses swerved aside; and there
his soul and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief encompassed Hector’s
soul for sake of his charioteer. Yet left he him there lying, though he
sorrowed for his comrade, and drave in quest of a bold charioteer; and
his horses lacked not long a master, for anon he found Iphitos’ son,
bold Archeptolemos, and him he made mount behind his fleet horses, and
gave the reins into his hands.

Then had destruction come and deeds beyond remedy been wrought, and so
had they been penned in Ilios like lambs, had not the father of gods
and men been swift to mark. So he thundered terribly and darted his
white lightning and hurled it before Diomedes’ steeds to earth; and
there arose a terrible flame of sulphur burning, and the two horses
were affrighted and cowered beneath the car. And the shining reins
dropped from Nestor’s hands, and he was afraid at heart and spake to
Diomedes: “Come now Tydeides, turn back thy whole-hooved horses to
flight: seest thou not that victory from Zeus attendeth not on thee?
Now doth Kronos’ son vouchsafe glory to this Hector, for the day;
hereafter shall he grant it us likewise, if he will. A man may not at
all ward off the will of Zeus, not though one be very valiant; he
verily is mightier far.”

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry answered him: “Yea verily, old man,
all this thou sayest is according unto right. But this is the sore
grief that entereth my heart and soul; Hector some day shall say as he
maketh harangue amid the Trojans: ‘Tydeides betook him to the ships in
flight before my face.’ So shall he boast—in that day let the wide
earth yawn for me.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Ah me, thou son of wise
Tydeus, that thou shouldest speak on this wise! Even though Hector call
thee a base man and coward, yet will not the Trojans hearken to him nor
the Dardanians, neither the wives of the great-hearted men of Troy,
bearers of the shield, the wives whose lusty bedfellows thou hast laid
low in the dust.”

So spake he and turned the whole-hooved horses to flight, back through
the tumult; and the Trojans and Hector with wondrous uproar poured upon
them their dolorous darts. And over him shouted loudly great Hector of
the glancing helm: “Tydeides, the fleet-horsed Danaans were wont to
honour thee with the highest place, and meats, and cups brimful, but
now will they disdain thee; thou art after all no better than a woman.
Begone, poor puppet; not for my flinching shalt thou climb on our
towers, neither carry our wives away upon thy ships; ere that will I
deal thee thy fate.”

So said he, and Tydeides was of divided mind, whether to wheel his
horses and fight him face to face. Thrice doubted he in heart and soul,
and thrice from Ida’s mountains thundered Zeus the lord of counsel, and
gave to the Trojans a sign, the turning of the course of battle. And
Hector with loud shout called to the Trojans: “Trojans and Lykians and
Dardanians that love close fight, be men, my friends, and bethink you
of impetuous valour. I perceive that of good will Kronion vouchsafest
me victory and great glory, and to the Danaans destruction. Fools, that
devised these walls weak and of none account; they shall not withhold
our fury, and lightly shall our steeds overleap the delved foss. But
when I be once come amid the hollow ships, then be thought taken of
consuming fire, that with fire I may burn the ships and slay the men,
even the Argives amid their ships, in confusion beneath the smoke.”

So spake he and shouted to his steeds, and said: “Xanthos, and thou
Podargos, and Aithon and goodly Lampos, now pay me back your tending,
even the abundance that Andromache, great-hearted Eëtion’s daughter,
set before you of honey-hearted wheat, and mingled wine to drink at the
heart’s bidding, sooner than for me, that verily avow me to be her
lusty spouse. Pursue ye now and haste, that we may seize Nestor’s
shield, the fame whereof now reacheth unto heaven, how that it is of
gold throughout, armrods and all; and may seize moreover from
horse-taming Diomedes’ shoulders his richly dight breastplate that
Hephaistos wrought cunningly. Could we but take these, then might I
hope this very night to make the Achaians to embark on their fleet
ships.”

So spake he boastfully, and queen Hera had indignation, and stirred her
upon her throne and made high Olympus quake, and answered and said to
the great god Poseidon: “Out on it, far-swaying Shaker of Earth; not
even thine heart within thy breast hath pity on the Danaans perishing.
Yet bring they to thee in Helike and Aigai offerings many and gracious:
wish thou them victory. Did we but will, we that are confederate with
the Danaans, to drive the Trojans back and withhold far-seeing Zeus,
then would he vex himself that he should sit there alone in Ida.”

Then was the lord the Shaker of earth sore troubled and made answer:
“Hera headstrong in speech, what is this thing thou sayest? I am not he
that would fain see us all at strife with Zeus Kronion, for he verily
is mightier far.”

Thus spake they to each other; and now was all the space that from the
ships the moat enclosed, even unto the wall, filled full of horses
together and shield-bearing warriors pent: so pent them Hector Priam’s
son, peer of fleet Ares, now that Zeus vouchsafed him glory. And now
had he burned the trim ships with blazing fire, but that queen Hera put
it in Agamemnon’s heart himself to bestir him and swiftly arouse the
Achaians. So he went his way along the huts and ships of the Achaians,
holding a great cloak of purple in his stalwart hand, and stood by
Odysseus’ black ship of mighty burden, that was in the midst, so that a
voice could be heard to either end, whether to the huts of Aias son of
Telamon, or of Achilles; for these had drawn their trim ships up at the
uttermost ends, trusting to their valour and to the might of their
hands. Then shouted he in a piercing voice, and called to the Danaans
aloud: “Fie upon you, Argives, ye sorry things of shame, so brave in
semblance! Whither are gone our boastings when we said that we were
bravest, the boasts ye uttered vaingloriously when in Lemnos, as ye ate
your fill of flesh of tall-horned oxen and drank goblets crowned with
wine, and said that every man should stand in war to face fivescore yea
tenscore Trojans? yet now can we not match one, even this Hector that
anon will burn our ships with flame of fire. O Father Zeus, didst ever
thou blind with such a blindness any mighty king, and rob him of great
glory? Yet I ween that never in my benched ship passed I by a fair
altar of thine on my mad way hither, but upon all I burnt fat and
thighs of oxen, being eager to lay waste well-walled Troy. Nay, Zeus,
this hope fulfil thou me; suffer that we ourselves at least flee and
escape, neither suffer that the Achaians be thus vanquished of the
Trojans.”

So spake he, and the Father had pity on him as he wept, and vouchsafed
him that his folk should be saved and perish not. Forthwith sent he an
eagle—surest sign among winged fowl—holding in his claws a fawn, the
young of a fleet hind; beside the beautiful altar of Zeus he let fall
the fawn, where the Achaians did sacrifice unto Zeus lord of all
oracles. So when they saw that the bird was come from Zeus, they sprang
the more upon the Trojans and bethought them of the joy of battle.

Now could no man of the Danaans, for all they were very many, boast
that he before Tydeus’ son had guided his fleet horses forth, and
driven them across the trench and fought man to man; first by far was
Tydeides to slay a warrior of the Trojans in full array, even Agelaos
son of Phradmon. Now he had turned his steeds to flee; but as he
wheeled the other plunged the spear into his back between his
shoulders, and drave it through his breast. So fell he from his
chariot, and his armour clanged upon him.

And after him came Atreus’ sons, even Agamemnon and Menelaos, and after
them the Aiantes clothed upon with impetuous valour, and after them
Idomeneus and Idomeneus’ brother in arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios
slayer of men, and after them Eurypylos, Euaimon’s glorious son. And
ninth came Teukros, stretching his back-bent bow, and took his stand
beneath the shield of Aias son of Telamon. And so Aias would stealthily
withdraw the shield, and Teukros would spy his chance; and when he had
shot and smitten one in the throng, then fell such an one and gave up
the ghost, and Teukros would return, and as a child beneath his mother,
so gat he him to Aias; who hid him with the shining shield.

Now who first of the Trojans was slain of noble Teukros? Orsilochos
first and Ormenos and Ophelestes and Daitor and Chromios and godlike
Lykophontes and Amopaon Polyaimon’s son and Melanippos; all these in
turn laid he upon the bounteous earth. And Agamemnon king of men
rejoiced to behold him making havoc with his stalwart bow of the
battalions of the Trojans, and he came and stood by his side and spake
to him, saying: “Teukros, dear heart, thou son of Telamon, prince of
the host, shoot on in this wise, if perchance thou mayest be found the
salvation of the Danaans and glory of thy father Telamon; who nurtured
thee when thou wast little, and reared thee, though a bastard, in his
house; exalt thou him to honour, though he be afar. Moreover I will say
to thee that which shall indeed be fulfilled. If aegis-bearing Zeus and
Athene vouchsafe me to lay waste the stablished city of Ilios, in thine
hand first, after myself, will I bestow the meed of honour, be it a
tripod or two steeds with their chariot, or a woman that shall go up
into thy bed.”

And noble Teukros made answer and said to him: “Most noble son of
Atreus, why urgest thou me that myself am eager? Verily with such
strength as is in me forbear I not, but ever since we drave them
towards Ilios I watch with my bow to slay the foemen. Eight long-barbed
arrows have I now sped, and all are buried in the flesh of young men
swift in battle; only this mad dog can I not smite.”

He said, and shot another arrow from the string right against Hector;
and his heart was fain to smite him. Yet him he missed, but noble
Gorgythion, Priam’s good son, he smote with an arrow in the breast, him
born of a mother wedded from Aisyme, even fair Kastianeira, of favour
like unto the gods. Even as in a garden a poppy droopeth its head
aside, being heavy with fruit and the showers of spring; so bowed he
aside his head laden with his helm.

And Teukros shot another arrow from the string, right against Hector,
and his heart was fain to smite him. Yet missed he once again, for
Apollo turned the dart away; but Archeptolemos, Hector’s bold
charioteer, he smote on the breast beside the nipple as he hasted into
battle: so he fell from his car and his fleet-footed horses swerved
aside; and there his soul and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief
encompassed Hector’s soul for his charioteer’s sake; yet left he him,
though he sorrowed for his comrade, and bade Kebriones his own brother,
being hard by, take the chariot reins; and he heard and disregarded
not. And himself he leapt to earth from the resplendent car, with a
terrible shout; and in his hand he caught a stone, and made right at
Teukros, and his heart bade him smite him. Now Teukros had plucked
forth from his quiver a keen arrow, and laid it on the string; but even
as he drew it back, Hector of the glancing helm smote him with the
jagged stone, as he aimed eagerly against him, even beside his
shoulder, where the collar-bone fenceth off neck and breast, and where
is the most deadly spot; and he brake the bowstring,* and his hand from
the wrist grew numb, and he stayed fallen upon his knee, and his bow
dropped from his hand. But Aias disregarded not his brother’s fall, but
ran and strode across him and hid him with his shield. Then two trusty
comrades bent down to him, even Mekisteus son of Echios and goodly
Alastor, and bare him, groaning sorely, to the hollow ships. And once
again the Olympian aroused the spirit of the Trojans. So they drove the
Achaians straight toward the deep foss, and amid the foremost went
Hector exulting in his strength. And even as when a hound behind wild
boar or lion, with swift feet pursuing snatcheth at him, at flank or
buttock, and watcheth for him as he wheeleth, so Hector pressed hard on
the flowing-haired Achaians, slaying ever the hindmost, and they fled
on. But when they were passed in flight through palisade and foss, and
many were fallen beneath the Trojans’ hands, then halted they and
tarried beside the ships, calling one upon another, and lifting up
their hands to all the gods prayed each one instantly. But Hector
wheeled round his beauteous-maned steeds this way and that, and his
eyes were as the eyes of Gorgon or Ares bane of mortals.

* νευρήν may mean “the sinew of his arm.”


Now at the sight of them the white-armed goddess Hera had compassion,
and anon spake winged words to Athene: “Out on it, thou child of
aegis-bearing Zeus, shall not we twain any more take thought for the
Danaans that perish, if only for this last time? Now will they fill up
the measure of evil destiny and perish by one man’s onslaught; seeing
that he is furious now beyond endurance, this Hector son of Priam, and
verily hath wrought many a deed of ill.”

And the bright-eyed goddess Athene made answer to her, “Yea in good
sooth, may this fellow yield up strength and life, and perish at the
Argives’ hands in his native land; only mine own sire is furious, with
no good intent, headstrong, ever sinful, the foiler of my purposes.
Neither remembereth he at all those many times and oft that I saved his
son fordone with Eurystheus’ tasks. For he would make lament toward
heaven, and me would Zeus speed forth from heaven to succour him. Had I
but known all this in my prudent heart, what time Eurystheus sent him
forth to the house of Hades the Warder of the Gate, to bring from
Erebos the hound of loathed Hades, then had he not escaped the sheer
stream of the water of Styx. But now Zeus hateth me, and fulfilleth the
purposes of Thetis, that kissed his knees and with her hand touched his
beard, beseeching him to do honour to Achilles waster of cities. Verily
the day shall come when he shall call me again his bright-eyed darling.
But now make thou ready our whole-hooved horses, while I enter into the
palace of aegis-bearing Zeus and gird me in my armour for battle, that
I may see if Priam’s son, Hector of the glancing helm, shall be glad at
the appearing of us twain amid the highways of the battle. Surely shall
many a Trojan likewise glut dogs and birds with fat and flesh, fallen
dead at the ships of the Achaians.”

So said she, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not. So Hera,
the goddess queen, daughter of great Kronos, went her way and harnessed
the golden-frontleted steeds; and Athene, daughter of aegis-bearing
Zeus, cast down at her father’s threshold her woven vesture
many-coloured, that herself had wrought and her hands had fashioned;
and put on her the tunic of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, and arrayed her in
her armour for dolorous battle. Upon the flaming chariot set she her
foot, and grasped her heavy spear great and stout, wherewith she
vanquisheth the ranks of men, even of heroes with whom she of the awful
sire is wroth. Then Hera swiftly smote the horses with the lash;
self-moving groaned upon their hinges the gates of heaven whereof the
Hours are warders, to whom is committed great heaven and Olympus,
whether to throw open the thick cloud or set it to. There through the
gates guided they their horses patient of the lash.

But when father Zeus beheld from Ida, he was sore wroth, and sped Iris
golden-winged to bear a message: “Go thy way, fleet Iris, turn them
back neither suffer them to face me; for in no happy wise shall we join
in combat. For thus will I declare, and even so shall the fulfilment
be; I will maim their fleet horses in the chariot, and them will I hurl
out from the car, and will break in pieces the chariot; neither within
the courses of ten years shall they heal them of the wounds the
thunderbolt shall tear; that the bright-eyed one may know the end when
she striveth against her father. But with Hera have I not so great
indignation nor wrath: seeing it ever is her wont to thwart me,
whate’er I have decreed.”

So said he, and whirlwind-footed Iris arose to bear the message, and
departed from the mountains of Ida unto high Olympus. And even at the
entrance of the gates of Olympus many-folded she met them and stayed
them, and told them the saying of Zeus: “Whither hasten ye? Why are
your hearts furious within your breasts? Kronides forbiddeth you to
give the Argives succour. For thus the son of Kronos threateneth, even
as he will fulfil; to wit, to maim your fleet horses in the chariot,
and you will he hurl out from the car, and break the chariot in pieces;
neither within the courses of ten years shall ye heal you of the wounds
that the thunderbolt shall tear; that thou, bright-eyed goddess, mayst
know the end when thou strivest against thy father. But with Hera hath
he not so great indignation nor wrath; seeing it ever is her wont to
thwart him, whate’er he have decreed. But most fell art thou, reckless
vixen! if thou indeed wilt dare to lift thy huge spear against the face
of Zeus.”

So said fleet-footed Iris, and departed; but Hera spake to Athene and
said: “Out on it, thou child of aegis-bearing Zeus, I verily would no
more have us war against Zeus for mortals’ sake. Of them let one man
perish and another live, even as the lot falleth; and for him, let him
take counsel for himself in his heart, and give judgment for Trojans
and for Danaans, as is meet.”

So saying she turned back her whole-hooved horses. Then the Hours
unyoked them their beauteous-maned horses, and tethered them to their
ambrosial mangers, and leant the chariots against the shining faces of
the gateway; and the goddesses sate them upon their golden thrones amid
the throng of all the gods, and were grieved at heart.

And father Zeus drave from Ida his fair-wheeled chariot and horses unto
Olympus, and came unto the session of the gods. For him also the noble
Shaker of Earth unyoked the steeds, and set the car upon the stand, and
spread a cloth thereover; and far-seeing Zeus himself sate upon his
golden throne, and beneath his feet great Olympus quaked. Only Athene
and Hera sate apart from Zeus, and spake no word to him neither
questioned him. But he was ware thereof in his heart, and said, “Why
are ye thus vexed, Athene and Hera? Surely ye are not wearied of making
havoc in glorious battle of the Trojans, for whom ye cherish bitter
hate! Howsoever, seeing that my might is so great and my hands
invincible, all the gods that are in Olympus could not turn me: and for
you twain, trembling erst gat hold upon your bright limbs ere that ye
beheld war and war’s fell deeds. For thus will I declare, and even so
had the fulfilment been—never had ye, once smitten with the
thunderbolt, fared on your chariots back unto Olympus where is the
habitation of the immortals.”

So spake he, and Athene and Hera murmured, that were sitting by him and
devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace, and said not
anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold upon her;
but Hera’s heart contained not her anger, and she spake: “Most dread
son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast said? Well know we, even we,
that thy might is no wise puny; yet still have we pity for the Danaan
spearmen, that now shall perish and fill up the measure of grievous
fate. Yet will we refrain from battle, if thou biddest us; but counsel
will we offer to the Argives, such as shall profit them, that they
perish not all at thy wrath.”

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said: “At morn shalt thou
behold most mighty Kronion, if thou wilt have it so, O Hera, ox-eyed
queen, making yet more havoc of the vast army of Argive spearmen; for
headlong Hector shall not refrain from battle till that Peleus’ son
fleet of foot have arisen beside the ships, that day when these shall
fight amid the sterns in most grievous stress, around Patroklos fallen.
Such is the doom of heaven. And for thine anger reck I not, not even
though thou go to the nethermost bounds of earth and sea, where sit
Iapetos and Kronos and have no joy in the beams of Hyperion the
Sun-god, neither in any breeze, but deep Tartaros is round about them.
Though thou shouldest wander till thou come even thither, yet reck I
not of thy vexation, seeing there is no thing more unabashed than
thou.”

So said he, but white-armed Hera spake him no word. And the sun’s
bright light dropped into Ocean, drawing black night across Earth the
grain-giver. Against the Trojans’ will daylight departed, but welcome,
thrice prayed for, to the Achaians came down the murky night.

Now glorious Hector made an assembly of the Trojans, taking them apart
from the ships, beside the eddying river, in an open space where was
found a spot clear of dead. And they came down from their chariots to
the ground to hear the word that Hector, dear unto Zeus, proclaimed. He
in his hand held his spear eleven cubits long; before his face gleamed
the spear-head of bronze, and a ring of gold ran round about it.
Thereon he leaned and spake to the Trojans, saying: “Hearken to me,
Trojans and Dardanians and allies. I thought but now to make havoc of
the ships and all the Achaians and depart back again to windy Ilios;
but dusk came too soon, and that in chief hath now saved the Argives
and the ships beside the beach of the sea. So let us now yield to black
night, and make our supper ready; unyoke ye from the chariots your
fair-maned horses, and set fodder beside them. And from the city bring
kine and goodly sheep with speed; and provide you with honey-hearted
wine, and corn from your houses, and gather much wood withal, that all
night long until early-springing dawn we may burn many fires, and the
gleam may reach to heaven; lest perchance even by night the
flowing-haired Achaians strive to take flight over the broad back of
the sea. Verily must they not embark upon their ships unvexed, at ease:
but see ye that many a one of them have a wound to nurse even at home,
being stricken with arrow or keen-pointed spear as he leapeth upon his
ship; that so many another man may dread to wage dolorous war on the
horse-taming men of Troy. And let the heralds dear to Zeus proclaim
throughout the city that young maidens and old men of hoary heads camp
round the city on the battlements builded of the gods; and let the
women folk burn a great fire each in her hall; and let there be a sure
watch set, lest an ambush enter the city when the host is absent. Thus
be it, great-hearted Trojans, as I proclaim; the counsel that now is
sound, let that stand spoken; further will I proclaim at dawn amid the
horse-taming men of Troy. I pray with good hope to Zeus and all the
gods, to drive from hence these dogs borne onward by the fates, them
that the fates bear on in the black ships. Howbeit for the night will
we guard our own selves, and at morn by daybreak, arrayed in our
armour, let us awake keen battle at the hollow ships. I will know
whether Tydeus’ son stalwart Diomedes shall thrust me from the ships
back to the wall, or I shall lay him low with my spear and bear away
his gory spoils. Tomorrow shall he prove his valour, whether he can
abide the onslaught of my spear. But he amid the foremost, I ween,
shall lie stricken, and many comrades round about their lord at the
rising of tomorrow’s sun. Would that I were immortal and ageless all my
days and honoured like as Athene is honoured and Apollo, so surely as
this day bringeth the Argives ill.”

So Hector made harangue, and the Trojans clamoured applause. And they
loosed their sweating steeds from the yoke, and tethered them with
thongs, each man beside his chariot; and from the city they brought
kine and goodly sheep with speed, and provided them with honey-hearted
wine and corn from their houses, and gathered much wood withal; and
sacrificed to the immortals unblemished hecatombs. And from the plain
the winds bare into heaven the sweet savour. But the blessed gods
regaled not themselves nor would they aught thereof; for sore was holy
Ilios hated of them, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen
spear. But these with high hopes sate them all night along the highways
of the battle, and their watchfires burned in multitude. Even as when
in heaven the stars about the bright moon shine clear to see, when the
air is windless, and all the peaks appear and the tall headlands and
glades, and from heaven breaketh open the infinite air, and all stars
are seen, and the shepherd’s heart is glad; even in like multitude
between the ships and the streams of Xanthos appeared the watchfires
that the Trojans kindled in front of Ilios. A thousand fires burned in
the plain and by the side of each sate fifty in the gleam of blazing
fire. And the horses champed white barley and spelt, and standing by
their chariots waited for the throned Dawn.




BOOK IX.


How Agamemnon sent an embassage to Achilles, beseeching him to be
appeased; and how Achilles denied him.


Thus kept the Trojans watch; but the Achaians were holden of
heaven-sent panic, handmaid of palsying fear, and all their best were
stricken to the heart with grief intolerable. Like as two winds stir up
the main, the home of fishes, even the north wind and the west wind
that blow from Thrace, coming suddenly; and the dark billow straightway
lifteth up its crest and casteth much tangle out along the sea; even so
was the Achaians’ spirit troubled in their breast.

But Atreides was stricken to the heart with sore grief, and went about
bidding the clear-voiced heralds summon every man by name to the
assembly, but not to shout aloud; and himself he toiled amid the
foremost. So they sat sorrowful in assembly, and Agamemnon stood up
weeping like unto a fountain of dark water that from a beetling cliff
poureth down its black stream; even so with deep groaning he spake amid
the Argives and said: “My friends, leaders and captains of the Argives,
Zeus son of Kronos hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of
soul; hard of heart is he, for that erewhile he promised and gave his
pledge that not till I had laid waste well-walled Ilios should I
depart, but now hath planned a cruel wile, and biddeth me return in
dishonour to Argos with the loss of many of my folk. Such meseemeth is
the good pleasure of most mighty Zeus, that hath laid low the heads of
many cities, yea and shall lay low; for his is highest power. So come,
even as I shall bid let us all obey; let us flee with our ships to our
dear native land, for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy.”

So said he, and they all held their peace and kept silence. Long time
were the sons of the Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last
Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake amid them and said: “Atreides: with
thee first in thy folly will I contend, where it is just, O king, even
in the assembly; be not thou wroth therefor. My valour didst thou blame
in chief amid the Danaans, and saidst that I was no man of war but a
coward; and all this know the Argives both young and old. But the son
of crooked-counselling Kronos hath endowed thee but by halves; he
granted thee to have the honour of the sceptre above all men, but
valour he gave thee not, wherein is highest power. Sir, deemest thou
that the sons of the Achaians are thus indeed cowards and weaklings as
thou sayest? If thine own heart be set on departing, go thy way; the
way is before thee, and thy ships stand beside the sea, even the great
multitude that followed thee from Mykene. But all the other
flowing-haired Achaians will tarry here until we lay waste Troy. Nay,
let them too flee on their ships to their dear native land; yet will we
twain, even I and Sthenelos, fight till we attain the goal of Ilios;
for in God’s name are we come.”

So said he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted aloud, applauding
the saying of horse-taming Diomedes. Then knightly Nestor arose and
said amid them: “Tydeides, in battle art thou passing mighty, and in
council art thou best among thine equals in years; none of all the
Achaians will make light of thy word nor gainsay it; but thou hast not
made a full end of thy words. Moreover thou art a young man indeed, and
mightest even be my son, my youngest-born; yet thou counsellest
prudently the princes of the Achaians, because thou speakest according
unto right. But lo, I that avow me to be older than thou will speak
forth and expound everything; neither shall any man despise my saying,
not even the lord Agamemnon. A tribeless, lawless, homeless man is he
that loveth bitter civil strife. Howbeit now let us yield to black
night and make ready now let us yield to black night and make ready our
meal; and let the sentinels bestow them severally along the deep-delved
foss without the wall. This charge give I to the young men; and thou,
Atreides, lead then the way, for thou art the most royal. Spread thou a
feast for the councillors; that is thy place and seemly for thee. Thy
huts are full of wine that the ships of the Achaians bring thee by day
from Thrace across the wide sea; all entertainment is for thee, being
king over many. In the gathering of many shalt thou listen to him that
deviseth the most excellent counsel; sore need have all the Achaians of
such as is good and prudent, because hard by the ships our foemen are
burning their watch-fires in multitude; what man can rejoice thereat?
This night shall either destroy or save the host.”

So said he, and they gladly hearkened to him and obeyed. Forth sallied
the sentinels in their harness, around Thrasymedes Nestor’s son,
shepherd of the host, and Askalaphos and Ialmenos sons of Ares, and
Meriones and Aphareus and Deïpyros and Kreion’s son noble Lykomedes.
Seven were the captains of the sentinels, and with each went fivescore
young men bearing their long spears in their hands; and they took post
midway betwixt foss and wall, and kindled a fire and made ready each
man his meal.

Then Atreides gathered the councillors of the Achaians, and led them to
his hut, and spread before them an abundant feast. So they put forth
their hands to the good cheer that lay before them. And when they had
put away from them the desire of meat and drink, then the old man first
began to weave his counsel, even Nestor, whose rede of old time was
approved the best. He of good intent spake to them and said: “Most
noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, in thy name will I end and
with thy name begin, because thou art king over many hosts, and to thy
hand Zeus hath entrusted sceptre and law, that thou mayest take counsel
for thy folk. Thee therefore more than any it behoveth both to speak
and hearken, and to accomplish what another than thou may say, when his
heart biddeth him speak for profit: wheresoever thou leadest all shall
turn on thee, so I will speak as meseemeth best. No other man shall
have a more excellent thought than this that I bear in mind from old
time even until now, since the day when thou, O heaven-sprung king,
didst go and take the damsel Briseis from angry Achilles’ hut by no
consent of ours. Nay, I right heartily dissuaded thee; but thou
yieldedst to thy proud spirit, and dishonouredst a man of valour whom
even the immortals honoured; for thou didst take and keepest from him
his meed of valour. Still let us even now take thought how we may
appease him and persuade him with gifts of friendship and kindly
words.”

And Agamemnon king of men answered and said to him: “Old sir, in no
false wise hast thou accused my folly. Fool was I, I myself deny it
not. Worth many hosts is he whom Zeus loveth in his heart, even as now
he honoureth this man and destroyeth the host of the Achaians. But
seeing I was a fool in that I yielded to my sorry passion, I will make
amends and give a recompense beyond telling. In the midst of you all I
will name the excellent gifts; seven tripods untouched of fire, and ten
talents of gold and twenty gleaming caldrons, and twelve stalwart
horses, winners in the race, that have taken prizes by their speed. No
lackwealth were that man, neither undowered of precious gold, whose
substance were as great as the prizes my whole-hooved steeds have borne
me off. And seven women will I give, skilled in excellent handiwork,
Lesbians whom I chose me from the spoils the day that he himself took
stablished Lesbos, surpassing womankind in beauty. These will I give
him, and with them shall be she whom erst I took from him, even the
daughter of Briseus; moreover I will swear a great oath that never I
went up into her bed nor had with her converse as is the wont of
mankind, even of men and women. All these things shall be set
straightway before him; and if hereafter the gods grant us to lay waste
the great city of Priam, then let him enter in when we Achaians be
dividing the spoil, and lade his ship full of gold and bronze, and
himself choose twenty Trojan women, the fairest that there be after
Helen of Argos. And if we win to the richest of lands, even Achaian
Argos, he shall be my son and I will hold him in like honour with
Orestes, my stripling boy that is nurtured in all abundance. Three
daughters are mine in my well-builded hall, Chrysothemis and Laodike
and Iphianassa; let him take of them which he will, without gifts of
wooing, to Peleus’ house; and I will add a great dower such as no man
ever yet gave with his daughter. And seven well-peopled cities will I
give him, Kardamyle and Enope and grassy Hire and holy Pherai and
Antheia deep in meads, and fair Aipeia and Pedasos land of vines. And
all are nigh to the salt sea, on the uttermost border of sandy Pylos;
therein dwell men abounding in flocks and kine, men that shall worship
him like a god with gifts, and beneath his sway fulfil his prosperous
ordinances. All this will I accomplish so he but cease from wrath. Let
him yield; Hades I ween is not to be softened neither overcome, and
therefore is he hatefullest of all gods to mortals. Yea, let him be
ruled by me, inasmuch as I am more royal and avow me to be the elder in
years.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered and said: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, now are these gifts not lightly to be
esteemed that thou offerest king Achilles. Come therefore, let us speed
forth picked men to go with all haste to the hut of Peleus’ son
Achilles. Lo now, whomsoever I appoint let them consent. First let
Phoinix dear to Zeus lead the way, and after him great Aias and noble
Odysseus; and for heralds let Odios and Eurybates be their companions.
And now bring water for our hands, and bid keep holy silence, that we
may pray unto Zeus the son of Kronos, if perchance he will have mercy
upon us.”

So said he, and spake words that were well-pleasing unto all. Forthwith
the heralds poured water on their hands, and the young men crowned the
bowls with drink and gave each man his portion after they had poured
the libation in the cups. And when they had made libation and drunk as
their heart desired, they issued forth from the hut of Agamemnon son of
Atreus. And knightly Nestor of Gerenia gave them full charge, with many
a glance to each, and chiefest to Odysseus, how they should essay to
prevail on Peleus’ noble son.

So the twain went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, making
instant prayer to the earth-embracer, the Shaker of the Earth, that
they might with ease prevail on Aiakides’ great heart. So they came to
the huts and ships of the Myrmidons, and found their king taking his
pleasure of a loud lyre, fair, of curious work, with a silver cross-bar
upon it; one that he had taken from the spoils when he laid Eëtion’s
city waste. Therein he was delighting his soul, and singing the glories
of heroes. And over against him sate Patroklos alone in silence,
watching till Aiakides should cease from singing. So the twain came
forward, and noble Odysseus led the way, and they stood before his
face; and Achilles sprang up amazed with the lyre in his hand, and left
the seat where he was sitting, and in like manner Patroklos when he
beheld the men arose. Then Achilles fleet of foot greeted them and
said: “Welcome; verily ye are friends that are come—sore indeed is the
need—even ye that are dearest of the Achaians to me even in my wrath.”

So spake noble Achilles and led them forward, and made them sit on
settles and carpets of purple; and anon he spake to Patroklos being
near: “Bring forth a greater bowl, thou son of Menoitios; mingle
stronger drink, and prepare each man a cup, for dearest of men are
these that are under my roof.”

So said he, and Patroklos hearkened to his dear comrade. He cast down a
great fleshing-block in the fire-light, and laid thereon a sheep’s back
and a fat goat’s, and a great hog’s chine rich with fat. And Automedon
held them for him, while Achilles carved. Then he sliced well the meat
and pierced it through with spits, and Menoitios’ son, that godlike
hero, made the fire burn high. Then when the fire was burned down and
the flame waned, he scattered the embers and laid the spits thereover,
resting them on the spit-racks, when he had sprinkled them with holy
salt. Then when he had roasted the meat and apportioned it in the
platters, Patroklos took bread and dealt it forth on the table in fair
baskets, and Achilles dealt the meat. And he sate him over against
godlike Odysseus by the other wall, and bade his comrade Patroklos do
sacrifice to the gods; so he cast the first-fruits into the fire. Then
put they forth their hands to the good cheer lying before them. And
when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Aias nodded
to Phoinix. But noble Odysseus marked it, and filled a cup with wine
and pledged Achilles: “Hail, O Achilles! The fair feast lack we not
either in the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus neither now in thine; for
feasting is there abundance to our heart’s desire, but our thought is
not for matters of the delicious feast; nay, we behold very sore
destruction, thou fosterling of Zeus, and are afraid. Now is it in
doubt whether we save the benched ships or behold them perish, if thou
put not on thy might. Nigh unto ships and wall have the high-hearted
Trojans and famed allies pitched their camp, and kindled many fires
throughout their host, and ween that they shall no more be withheld but
will fall on our black ships. And Zeus son of Kronos sheweth them signs
upon the right by lightning, and Hector greatly exulteth in his might
and rageth furiously, trusting in Zeus, and recketh not of god nor man,
for mighty madness hath possessed him. He prayeth bright Dawn to shine
forth with all speed, for he bath passed his word to smite off from the
ships the ensigns’ tops, and to fire the hulls with devouring flame,
and hard thereby to make havoc of the Achaians confounded by the smoke.
Therefore am I sore afraid in my heart lest the gods fulfil his
boastings, and it be fated for us to perish here in Troy-land, far from
Argos pasture-land of horses. Up then! if thou art minded even at the
last to save the failing sons of the Achaians from the war-din of the
Trojans. Thyself shalt have grief hereafter, and when the ill is done
is there no way to find a cure therefor; in good time rather take thou
thought to ward the evil day from the Danaans. Friend, surely to thee
thy father Peleus gave commandment the day he sent thee to Agamemnon
forth from Phthia: ‘My son, strength shall Athene and Hera give thee if
they will; but do thou refrain thy proud soul in thy breast, for
gentlemindedness is the better part; and withdraw from mischievous
strife, that so the Argives may honour thee the more, both young and
old.’ Thus the old man charged thee, but thou forgettest. Yet cease now
at the last, and eschew thy grievous wrath; Agamemnon offereth thee
worthy gifts, so thou wilt cease from anger. Lo now, hearken thou to
me, and I will tell thee all the gifts that in his hut Agamemnon
promised thee: seven tripods untouched of fire, and ten talents of gold
and twenty gleaming caldrons and twelve stalwart horses, winners in the
race, that have taken prizes by their speed. No lackwealth were that
man, neither undowered of precious gold, whose substance were as great
as the prizes Agamemnon’s steeds have borne him off. And seven women
will he give, skilled in excellent handiwork, Lesbians whom he chose
him from the spoils the day that thou thyself tookest Lesbos,
surpassing womankind in beauty. These will he give thee, and with them
shall be she whom erst he took from thee, even the daughter of Briseus;
moreover he will swear a great oath that never he went up into her bed
nor had with her converse as is the wont of mankind, O king, even of
men and women. All these things shall be set straightway before thee;
and if hereafter the gods grant us to lay waste the great city of
Priam, then enter thou in when we Achaians be dividing the spoil, and
lade thy ship full of gold and bronze, and thyself choose twenty Trojan
women, the fairest that there be after Helen of Argos. And if we win to
the richest of lands, even Achaian Argos, thou shalt be his son and he
will hold thee in like honour with Orestes, his stripling boy that is
nurtured in all abundance. Three daughters are his in his well-builded
hall, Chrysothemis and Laodike and Iphianassa; take thou of them which
thou wilt, without gifts of wooing, to Peleus’ house; and he will add a
great dower such as no man ever yet gave with his daughter. And seven
well-peopled cities will he give thee, Kardamyle and Enope and grassy
Hire and holy Pherai and Antheia deep in meads, and fair Aipeia and
Pedasos land of vines. And all are nigh to the sea, on the uttermost
border of sandy Pylos; therein dwell men abounding in flocks and kine,
men that shall worship thee like a god with gifts, and beneath thy sway
fulfil thy prosperous ordinances. All this will he accomplish so thou
but cease from wrath. But and if Agamemnon be too hateful to thy heart,
both he and his gifts, yet have thou pity on all the Achaians that
faint throughout the host; these shall honour thee as a god, for verily
thou wilt earn exceeding great glory at their hands. Yea now mightest
thou slay Hector, for he would come very near thee in his deadly
madness, because he deemeth that there is no man like unto him among
the Danaans that the ships brought hither.”

And Achilles fleet of foot answered and said unto him: “Heaven-sprung
son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, in openness must I now declare
unto you my saying, even as I am minded and as the fulfilment thereof
shall be, that ye may not sit before me and coax this way and that. For
hateful to me even as the gates of hell is he that hideth one thing in
his heart and uttereth another: but I will speak what meseemeth best.
Not me, I ween, shall Agamemnon son of Atreus persuade, nor the other
Danaans, seeing we were to have no thank for battling with the foemen
ever without respite. He that abideth at home hath equal share with him
that fighteth his best, and in like honour are held both the coward and
the brave; death cometh alike to the untoiling and to him that hath
toiled long. Neither have I any profit for that I endured tribulation
of soul, ever staking my life in fight. Even as a hen bringeth her
unfledged chickens each morsel as she winneth it, and with herself it
goeth hard, even so I was wont to watch out many a sleepless night and
pass through many bloody days of battle, warring with folk for their
women’s sake. Twelve cities of men have I laid waste from ship-board,
and from land eleven, I do you to wit, throughout deep-soiled
Troy-land; out of all these took I many goodly treasures and would
bring and give them all to Agamemnon son of Atreus, and he staying
behind amid the fleet ships would take them and portion out some few
but keep the most. Now some he gave to be meeds of honour to the
princes and the kings, and theirs are left untouched; only from me of
all the Achaians took he my darling lady and keepeth her—let him sleep
beside her and take his joy! But why must the Argives make war on the
Trojans? why hath Atreides gathered his host and led them hither? is it
not for lovely-haired Helen’s sake? Do then the sons of Atreus alone of
mortal men love their wives? surely whatsoever man is good and sound of
mind loveth his own and cherisheth her, even as I too loved mine with
all my heart, though but the captive of my spear. But now that he hath
taken my meed of honour from mine arms and hath deceived me, let him
not tempt me that know him full well; he shall not prevail. Nay,
Odysseus, let him take counsel with thee and all the princes to ward
from the ships the consuming fire. Verily without mine aid he hath
wrought many things, and built a wall and dug a foss about it wide and
deep, and set a palisade therein; yet even so can he not stay murderous
Hector’s might. But so long as I was fighting amid the Achaians, Hector
had no mind to array his battle far from the wall, but scarce came unto
the Skaian gates and to the oak-tree; there once he awaited me alone
and scarce escaped my onset. But now, seeing I have no mind to fight
with noble Hector, I will to-morrow do sacrifice to Zeus and all the
gods, and store well my ships when I have launched them on the salt
sea—then shalt thou see, if thou wilt and hast any care therefor, my
ships sailing at break of day over Hellespont, the fishes’ home, and my
men right eager at the oar; and if the great Shaker of the Earth grant
me good journey, on the third day should I reach deep-soiled Phthia.
There are my great possessions that I left when I came hither to my
hurt; and yet more gold and ruddy bronze shall I bring from hence, and
fair-girdled women and grey iron, all at least that were mine by lot;
only my meed of honour hath he that gave it me taken back in his
despitefulness, even lord Agamemnon son of Atreus. To him declare ye
everything even as I charge you, openly, that all the Achaians likewise
may have indignation, if haply he hopeth to beguile yet some other
Danaan, for that he is ever clothed in shamelessness. Verily not in my
face would he dare to look, though he have the front of a dog. Neither
will I devise counsel with him nor any enterprise, for utterly he hath
deceived me and done wickedly; but never again shall he beguile me with
fair speech—let this suffice him. Let him begone in peace; Zeus the
lord of counsel hath taken away his wits. Hateful to me are his gifts,
and I hold him at a straw’s worth. Not even if he gave me ten times,
yea twenty, all that now is his, and all that may come to him
otherwhence, even all the revenue of Orchomenos or Egyptian Thebes
where the treasure-houses are stored fullest—Thebes of the hundred
gates, whence sally forth two hundred warriors through each with horses
and chariots—nay, nor gifts in number as sand or dust; not even so
shall Agamemnon persuade my soul till he have paid me back all the
bitter despite. And the daughter of Agamemnon son of Atreus will I not
wed, not were she rival of golden Aphrodite for fairness and for
handiwork matched bright-eyed Athene—not even then will I wed her; let
him choose him of the Achaians another that is his peer and is more
royal than I. For if the gods indeed preserve me and I come unto my
home, then will Peleus himself seek me a wife. Many Achaian maidens are
there throughout Hellas and Phthia, daughters of princes that ward
their cities; whomsoever of these I wish will I make my dear lady. Very
often was my high soul moved to take me there a wedded wife, a help
meet for me, and have joy of the possessions that the old man Peleus
possesseth. For not of like worth with life hold I even all the wealth
that men say was possessed of the well-peopled city of Ilios in days of
peace gone by, before the sons of the Achaians came; neither all the
treasure that the stone threshold of the archer Phoebus Apollo
encompasseth in rocky Pytho. For kine and goodly flocks are to be had
for the harrying, and tripods and chestnut horses for the purchasing;
but to bring back man’s life neither harrying nor earning availeth when
once it hath passed the barrier of his lips. For thus my goddess mother
telleth me, Thetis the silver-footed, that twain fates are bearing me
to the issue of death. If I abide here and besiege the Trojans’ city,
then my returning home is taken from me, but my fame shall be
imperishable; but if I go home to my dear native land, my high fame is
taken from me, but my life shall endure long while, neither shall the
issue of death soon reach me. Moreover I would counsel you all to set
sail homeward, seeing ye shall never reach your goal of steep Ilios; of
a surety far-seeing Zeus holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of
good courage. So go your way and tell my answer to the princes of the
Achaians, even as is the office of elders, that they may devise in
their hearts some other better counsel, such as shall save them their
ships and the host of the Achaians amid the hollow ships: since this
counsel availeth them naught that they have now devised, by reason of
my fierce wrath. But let Phoinix now abide with us and lay him to rest,
that he may follow with me on my ships to our dear native land
to-morrow, if he will; for I will not take him perforce.”

So spake he, and they all held their peace and were still, and
marvelled at his saying; for he denied them very vehemently. But at the
last spake to them the old knight Phoinix, bursting into tears, because
he was sore afraid for the ships of the Achaians: “If indeed thou
ponderest departure in thy heart, glorious Achilles, and hast no mind
at all to save the fleet ships from consuming fire, because that wrath
hath entered into thy heart; how can I be left of thee, dear son, alone
thereafter? To thee did the old knight Peleus send me the day he sent
thee to Agamemnon forth from Phthia, a stripling yet unskilled in equal
war and in debate wherein men wax pre-eminent. Therefore sent he me to
teach thee all these things, to be both a speaker of words and a doer
of deeds. So would I not be left alone of thee, dear son, not even if
god himself should take on him to strip my years from me, and make me
fresh and young as in the day when first I left Hellas the home of fair
women, fleeing from strife against my father Amyntor son of Ormenos:
for he was sore angered with me by reason of his lovely-haired
concubine, whom he ever cherished and wronged his wife my mother. So
she besought me continually by my knees to go in first unto the
concubine, that the old man might be hateful to her. I hearkened to her
and did the deed; but my sire was ware thereof forthwith and cursed me
mightily, and called the dire Erinyes to look that never should any
dear son sprung of my body sit upon my* knees: and the gods fulfilled
his curse, even Zeus of the underworld and dread Persephone. [Then took
I counsel to slay him with the keen sword; but some immortal stayed
mine anger, bringing to my mind the people’s voice and all the
reproaches of men, lest I should be called a father-slayer amid the
Achaians.] Then would my soul no more be refrained at all within my
breast to tarry in the halls of mine angered father. Now my fellows and
my kinsmen came about me with many prayers, and refrained me there
within the halls, and slaughtered many goodly sheep and shambling kine
with crooked horns; and many swine rich with fat were stretched to
singe over the flames of Hephaistos, and wine from that old man’s jars
was drunken without stint. Nine nights long slept they all night around
my body; they kept watch in turn, neither were the fires quenched, one
beneath the colonnade of the fenced courtyard and another in the porch
before the chamber doors. But when the tenth dark night was come upon
me, then burst I my cunningly fitted chamber doors, and issued forth
and overleapt the courtyard fence lightly, unmarked of watchmen and
handmaidens. Then fled I far through Hellas of wide lawns, and came to
deep-soiled Phthia, mother of flocks, even unto king Peleus; and he
received me kindly and cherished me as a father cherisheth his only
son, his stripling heir of great possessions; and he made me rich and
gave much people to me, and I dwelt in the uttermost part of Phthia and
was king over the Dolopians. Yea, I reared thee to this greatness, thou
godlike Achilles, with my heart’s love; for with none other wouldest
thou go unto the feast, neither take meat in the hall, till that I had
set thee upon my knees and stayed thee with the savoury morsel cut
first for thee, and put the wine-cup to thy lips. Oft hast thou stained
the doublet on my breast with sputtering of wine in thy sorry
helplessness. Thus I suffered much with thee and much I toiled, being
mindful that the gods in nowise created any issue of my body; but I
made thee my son, thou godlike Achilles, that thou mayest yet save me
from grievous destruction. Therefore, Achilles, rule thy high spirit;
neither beseemeth it thee to have a ruthless heart. Nay, even the very
gods can bend, and theirs withal is loftier majesty and honour and
might. Their hearts by incense and reverent vows and drink-offering and
burnt-offering men turn with prayer, so oft as any transgresseth and
doeth sin. Moreover Prayers of penitence are daughters of great Zeus,
halting and wrinkled and of eyes askance, that have their task withal
to go in the steps of Sin. For Sin is strong and fleet of foot,
wherefore she far outrunneth all prayers, and goeth before them over
all the earth making men fall, and Prayers follow behind to heal the
harm. Now whosoever reverenceth Zeus’ daughters when they draw near,
him they greatly bless and hear his petitions; but when one denieth
them and stiffly refuseth, then depart they and make prayer unto Zeus
the son of Kronos that sin may come upon such an one, that he may fall
and pay the price. Nay, Achilles, look thou too that there attend upon
the daughters of Zeus the reverence that bendeth the heart of all men
that be right-minded. For if Atreides brought thee not gifts and
foretold thee not more hereafter, but were ever furiously wroth, then I
were not he that should bid thee cast aside thine anger and save the
Argives, even in their sore need of thee. But now he both offereth thee
forthwith many gifts, and promiseth thee more hereafter, and hath sent
heroes to beseech thee, the best men chosen throughout the host of the
Achaians and that to thyself are dearest of the Argives; dishonour not
thou their petition nor their journey hither; though erst it were no
wrong that thou wast wroth. Even in like manner have we heard the fame
of those heroes that were of old, as oft as furious anger came on any;
they might be won by gifts and prevailed upon by speech. This tale have
I in mind of old time and not of yesterday, even as it was; and I will
tell it among you that all are friends. The Kuretes** fought and the
staunch Aitolians about the city of Kalydon, and slew one another, the
Aitolians defending lovely Kalydon, the Kuretes eager to lay it waste
in war. For Artemis of the golden throne had brought a plague upon
them, in wrath that Oineus offered her not the harvest first-fruits on
the fat of his garden land; for all the other gods had their feast of
hecatombs, and only to the daughter of great Zeus offered he not,
whether he forgat or marked it not; and therein sinned he sore in his
heart. So the Archer-goddess was wroth and sent against him a creature
of heaven, a fierce wild boar, white-tusked, that wrought sore ill
continually on Oineus’ garden land; many a tall tree laid he low
utterly, even root and apple blossom therewith. But him slew Meleagros
the son of Oineus, having gathered together from many cities huntsmen
and hounds; for not of few men could the boar be slain, so mighty was
he; and many an one brought he to the grievous pyre. But the goddess
made much turmoil over him and tumult concerning the boar’s head and
shaggy hide, between the Kuretes and great-hearted Aitolians. Now so
long as Meleagros dear to Ares fought, so long it went ill with the
Kuretes, neither dared they face him without their city walls, for all
they were very many. But when Meleagros grew full of wrath, such as
swelleth the hearts of others likewise in their breasts, though they be
wise of mind, then in anger of heart at his dear mother Althaia he
tarried beside his wedded wife, fair Kleopatra, daughter of Marpessa
fair-ankled daughter of Euenos, and of Ides that was strongest of men
that were then upon the earth; he it was that took the bow to face the
king Phoebus Apollo for sake of the fair-ankled damsel***. And she was
called Alkyone of her father and lady mother by surname in their hall,
because her mother in the plight of the plaintive halcyon-bird wept
when the far-darter Phoebus Apollo snatched her away. By her side lay
Meleagros, brooding on his grievous anger, being wroth by reason of his
mother’s curses: for she, grieved for her brethren’s death, prayed
instantly to the gods, and with her hands likewise beat instantly upon
the fertile earth, calling on Hades and dread Persephone, while she
knelt upon her knees and made her bosom wet with tears, to bring her
son to death; and Erinnys that walketh in darkness, whose heart knoweth
not ruth, heard her from Erebos, Now was the din of foemen about their
gates quickly risen, and a noise of battering of towers; and the elders
of the Aitolians sent the best of the gods’ priests and besought him to
come forth and save them, with promise of a mighty gift; to wit, they
bade him, where the plain of lovely Kalydon was fattest, to choose him
out a fair demesne of fifty plough-gates, the half thereof vine-land
and the half open plough-land, to be cut from out the plain. And old
knightly Oineus prayed him instantly, and stood upon the threshold of
his high-roofed chamber, and shook the morticed doors to beseech his
son; him too his sisters and his lady mother prayed instantly—but he
denied them yet more—instantly too his comrades prayed, that were
nearest him and dearest of all men. Yet even so persuaded they not his
heart within his breast, until his chamber was now hotly battered and
the Kuretes were climbing upon the towers and firing the great city.
Then did his fair-girdled wife pray Meleagros with lamentation, and
told him all the woes that come on men whose city is taken; the
warriors are slain, and the city is wasted of fire, and the children
and the deep-girdled women are led captive of strangers. And his soul
was stirred to hear the grievous tale, and he went his way and donned
his glittering armour. So he saved the Aitolians from the evil day,
obeying his own will; but they paid him not now the gifts many and
gracious; yet nevertheless he drave away destruction. But be not thine
heart thus minded, neither let heaven so guide thee, dear son; that
were a hard thing, to save the ships already burning. Nay, come for the
gifts; the Achaians shall honour thee even as a god. But if without
gifts thou enter into battle the bane of men, thou wilt not be held in
like honour, even though thou avert the fray.”

* Or “his knees,” according to the more usual interpretation of οῖσιν.


** Note 2.


*** Note 3.


And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: “Phoinix my
father, thou old man fosterling of Zeus, such honour need I in no wise;
for I deem that I have been honoured by the judgment of Zeus, which
shall abide upon me amid my beaked ships as long as breath tarrieth in
my body and my limbs are strong. Moreover I will say this thing to thee
and lay thou it to thine heart; trouble not my soul by weeping and
lamentation, to do the pleasure of warrior Atreides; neither beseemeth
it thee to cherish him, lest thou be hated of me that cherish thee. It
were good that thou with me shouldest vex him that vexeth me. Be thou
king even as I, and share my sway by halves, but these shall bear my
message. So tarry thou here and lay thee to rest in a soft bed, and
with break of day will we consider whether to depart unto our own, or
to abide.”

He spake, and nodded his brow in silence unto Patroklos to spread for
Phoinix a thick couch, that the others might bethink them to depart
from the hut with speed. Then spake to them Aias, Telamon’s godlike
son, and said: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles,
let us go hence; for methinks the purpose of our charge will not by
this journey be accomplished; and we must tell the news, though it be
no wise good, with all speed unto the Danaans, that now sit awaiting.
But Achilles hath wrought his proud soul to fury within him—stubborn
man, that recketh naught of his comrades’ love, wherein we worshipped
him beyond all men amid the ships—unmerciful! Yet doth a man accept
recompense of his brother’s murderer or for his dead son; and so the
man-slayer for a great price abideth in his own land, and the kinsman’s
heart is appeased, and his proud soul, when he hath taken the
recompense. But for thee, the gods have put within thy breast a spirit
implacable and evil, by reason of one single damsel. And now we offer
thee seven damsels, far best of all, and many other gifts besides;
entertain thou then a kindly spirit, and have respect unto thine home;
because we are guests of thy roof, sent of the multitude of Danaans,
and we would fain be nearest to thee and dearest beyond all other
Achaians, as many as there be.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: “Aias sprung of
Zeus, thou son of Telamon, prince of the folk, thou seemest to speak
all this almost after mine own mind; but my heart swelleth with wrath
as oft as I bethink me of those things, how Atreides entreated me
arrogantly among the Argives, as though I were some worthless
sojourner. But go ye and declare my message; I will not take thought of
bloody war until that wise Priam’s son, noble Hector, come to the
Myrmidons’ huts and ships, slaying the Argives, and smirch the ships
with fire. But about mine hut and black ship I ween that Hector, though
he be very eager for battle, shall be refrained.”

So said he, and they took each man a two-handled cup, and made libation
and went back along the line of ships; and Odysseus led the way. And
Patroklos bade his fellows and handmaidens spread with all speed a
thick couch for Phoinix; and they obeyed and spread a couch as he
ordained, fleeces and rugs and fine flock of linen. Then the old man
laid him down and tarried for bright Dawn. And Achilles slept in the
corner of the morticed hut, and by his side lay a woman that he brought
from Lesbos, even Phorbas’ daughter fair-cheeked Diomede. And on the
other side Patroklos lay, and by his side likewise fair-girdled Iphis,
whom noble Achilles gave him at the taking of steep Skyros, the city of
Enyeus.


Now when those were come unto Atreides’ huts, the sons of the Achaians
stood up on this side and on that, and pledged them in cups of gold,
and questioned them; and Agamemnon king of men asked them first: “Come
now, tell me, Odysseus full of praise, thou great glory of the
Achaians; will he save the ships from consuming fire, or said he nay,
and hath wrath yet hold of his proud spirit?”

And steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him: “Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, he yonder hath no mind to quench his wrath, but
is yet more filled of fury, and spurneth thee and thy gifts. He biddeth
thee take counsel for thyself amid the Argives, how to save the ships
and folk of the Achaians. And for himself he threateneth that at break
of day he will launch upon the sea his trim well-benched ships.
Moreover he said that he would counsel all to sail for home, because ye
now shall never reach your goal of steep Ilios; surely far-seeing Zeus
holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of good courage. Even so
said he, and here are also these to tell the tale that were my
companions, Aias and the two heralds, both men discreet. But the old
man Phoinix laid him there to rest, even as Achilles bade him, that he
may follow with him on his ships to his dear native land to-morrow, if
he will; for he will not take him perforce.”

So said he, and they all held their peace and were still, marvelling at
his saying, for he harangued very vehemently. Long were the sons of the
Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last Diomedes of the loud
war-cry spake amid them: “Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of
men, would thou hadst never besought Peleus’ glorious son with offer of
gifts innumerable; proud is he at any time, but now hast thou yet far
more encouraged him in his haughtiness. Howbeit we will let him bide,
whether he go or tarry; hereafter he shall fight, whenever his heart
within him biddeth and god arouseth him. Come now, even as I shall say
let us all obey. Go ye now to rest, full to your hearts’ desire of meat
and wine, wherein courage is and strength; but when fair rosy-fingered
Dawn appeareth, array thou with all speed before the ships thy folk and
horsemen, and urge them on; and fight thyself amid the foremost.”

So said he, and all the princes gave assent, applauding the saying of
Diomedes tamer of horses. And then they made libation and went every
man to his hut, and there laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep.




BOOK X.


How Diomedes and Odysseus slew Dolon, a spy of the Trojans, and
themselves spied on the Trojan camp, and took the horses of Rhesos, the
Thracian king.


Now beside the ships the other leaders of the whole Achaian host were
sleeping all night long, by soft Sleep overcome, but Agamemnon son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, sweet Sleep held not, so many things he
debated in his mind. And even as when the lord of fair-tressed Hera
lighteneth, fashioning either a mighty rain unspeakable, or hail, or
snow, when the flakes sprinkle all the ploughed lands, or fashioning
perchance the wide mouth of bitter war, even so oft in his breast
groaned Agamemnon, from the very deep of his heart, and his spirits
trembled within him. And whensoever he looked toward that Trojan plain,
he marvelled at the many fires that blazed in front of Ilios, and at
the sound of flutes and pipes, and the noise of men; but whensoever to
the ships he glanced and the host of the Achaians, then rent he many a
lock clean forth from his head, to Zeus that is above, and greatly
groaned his noble heart.

And this in his soul seemed to him the best counsel, to go first of all
to Nestor son of Neleus, if perchance he might contrive with him some
right device that should be for the warding off of evil from all the
Danaans.

Then he rose, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
shining feet he bound on fair sandals, and thereafter clad him in the
tawny skin of a lion fiery and great, a skin that reached to the feet,
and he grasped his spear.

And even in like wise did trembling fear take hold on Menelaos, (for
neither on his eyelids did Sleep settle down,) lest somewhat should
befall the Argives, who verily for his sake over wide waters were come
to Troy-land, with fierce war in their thoughts.

With a dappled pard’s skin first he covered his broad shoulders, and he
raised and set on his head a casque of bronze, and took a spear in his
strong hand. Then went he on his way to rouse his brother, that
mightily ruled over all the Argives, and as a god was honoured by the
people. Him found he harnessing his goodly gear about his shoulders, by
the stern of the ship, and glad to his brother was his coming. Then
Menelaos of the loud war-cry first accosted him: “Wherefore thus, dear
brother, art thou arming? Wilt thou speed forth any of thy comrades to
spy on the Trojans? Nay, terribly I fear lest none should undertake for
thee this deed, even to go and spy out the foeman alone through the
ambrosial night; needs must he be a man right hardy of heart.”

Then the lord Agamemnon answered him and spake: “Need of good counsel
have I and thou, Menelaos fosterling of Zeus, of counsel that will help
and save the Argives and the ships, since the heart of Zeus hath turned
again. Surely on the sacrifices of Hector hath he set his heart rather
than on ours. For never did I see, nor heard any tell, that one man
devised so many terrible deeds in one day, as Hector, dear to Zeus,
hath wrought on the sons of the Achaians, unaided; though no dear son
of a goddess is he, nor of a god. He hath done deeds that methinks will
be a sorrow to the Argives, lasting and long, such evils hath he
devised against the Achaians. But go now, run swiftly by the ships, and
summon Aias and Idomeneus, but I will betake me to noble Nestor, and
bid him arise, if perchance he will be fain to go to the sacred company
of the sentinels and lay on them his command. For to him above others
would they listen, for his own son is chief among the sentinels, he and
the brother in arms of Idomeneus, even Meriones, for to them above all
we entrusted this charge.”

Then Menelaos of the loud war-cry answered him: “How meanest thou this
word wherewith thou dost command and exhort me? Am I to abide there
with them, waiting till thou comest, or run back again to thee when I
have well delivered to them thy commandment?”

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: “There do thou
abide lest we miss each other as we go, for many are the paths through
the camp. But call aloud, wheresoever thou goest, and bid men awake,
naming each man by his lineage, and his father’s name, and giving all
their dues of honour, nor be thou proud of heart. Nay rather let us
ourselves be labouring, for even thus did Zeus from our very birth
dispense to us the heaviness of toil.”

So he spake, and sent his brother away, having clearly laid on him his
commandment. Then went he himself after Nestor, the shepherd of the
host, whom he found by his hut and black ship, in his soft bed: beside
him lay his fair dight arms, a shield, and two spears, and a shining
helmet. Beside him lay his glittering girdle wherewith the old man was
wont to gird himself when he harnessed him for war, the bane of men,
and led on the host, for he yielded not to grievous old age. Then he
raised him on his elbow, lifting his head, and spake to the son of
Atreus, inquiring of him with this word: “Who art thou that farest
alone by the ships, through the camp in the dark night, when other
mortals are sleeping? Seekest thou one of thy mules, or of thy
comrades? speak, and come not silently upon me. What need hast thou?”

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: “O Nestor, son of
Neleus, great glory of the Achaians, thou shalt know Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, whom above all men Zeus hath planted for ever among labours,
while my breath abides within my breast, and my knees move. I wander
thus, for that sweet sleep rests not on mine eyes, but war is my care,
and the troubles of the Achaians. Yea, greatly I fear for the sake of
the Danaans, nor is my heart firm, but I am tossed to and fro, and my
heart is leaping from my breast, and my good knees tremble beneath me.
But if thou wilt do aught, since neither on thee cometh sleep, let us
go thither to the sentinels, that we may see them, lest they be fordone
with toil and drowsihead, and so are slumbering, and have quite
forgotten to keep watch. And hostile men camp hard by, nor know we at
all but that they are keen to do battle in the night.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Most renowned son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, assuredly not all his designs will
wise-counselling Zeus fulfil for Hector, even all that now he thinketh;
nay methinks he will contend with even more troubles if but Achilles
turn back his heart from grievous anger. And verily will I follow after
thee, but let us also rouse others again, both the son of Tydeus,
spearman renowned, and Odysseus, and swift Aias, and the strong son of
Phyleus. But well it would be if one were to go and call those also,
the godlike Aias, and Idomeneus the prince; for their ships are
furthest of all, and nowise close at hand. But Menelaos will I blame,
dear as he is and worshipful, yea, even if thou be angry with me, nor
will I hide my thought, for that he slumbereth, and to thee alone hath
left the toil; now should he be toiling among all the chiefs and
beseeching them, for need no longer tolerable is coming upon us.”

And the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: “Old man, another
day I even bid thee blame him, for often is he slack, and willeth not
to labour, yielding neither to unreadiness nor heedlessness of heart,
but looking toward me, and expecting mine instance. But now he awoke
far before me, and came to me, and him I sent forward to call those
concerning whom thou inquirest. But let us be gone, and them shall we
find before the gates, among the sentinels, for there I bade them
gather.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “So will none of the
Argives be wroth with him or disobey him, when soever he doth urge any
one, and give him his commands.”

So spake he and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
bright feet he bound goodly shoon, and all around him buckled a purple
cloak, with double folds and wide, and thick down all over it.

And he took a strong spear, pointed with sharp bronze, and he went
among the ships of the mail-clad Achaians. Then Odysseus first, the
peer of Zeus in counsel, did knightly Gerenian Nestor arouse out of
sleep, with his voice, and quickly the cry came all about his heart,
and he came forth from the hut and spake to them saying: “Wherefore
thus among the ships and through the camp do ye wander alone, in the
ambrosial night; what so great need cometh upon you?”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: “Laertes’ son, of the
seed of Zeus, Odysseus of many a wile, be not wroth, for great trouble
besetteth the Achaians. Nay follow, that we may arouse others too, even
all that it behoveth to take counsel, whether we should fly, or fight.”

So spake he, and Odysseus of the many counsels came to the hut, and
cast a shield  bedight about his shoulders, and went after them.

And they went to seek Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and him they found
outside his hut, with his arms, and around him his comrades were
sleeping with their shields beneath their heads, but their spears were
driven into the ground erect on the spikes of the butts, and afar shone
the bronze, like the lightning of father Zeus. Now that hero was
asleep, and under him was strewn the hide of an ox of the field, but
beneath his head was stretched a shining carpet. Beside him went and
stood knightly Nestor of Gerenia and stirred him with a touch of his
foot, and aroused him, chiding him to his face, saying: “Wake, son of
Tydeus, why all night long dost thou sleep? Knowest thou not that the
Trojans on the high place of the plain are camped near the ships, and
but a little space holdeth them apart?”

So spake he, and Diomedes sprang swiftly up out of sleep, and spake to
him winged words: “Hard art thou, old man, and from toil thou never
ceasest. Now are there not other younger sons of the Achaians, who
might rouse when there is need each of the kings, going all around the
host? but thou, old man, art indomitable.”

And him knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered again, “Nay verily, my son,
all this that thou sayest is according unto right. Noble sons have I,
and there be many of the host, of whom each man might go and call the
others. But a right great need hath assailed the Achaians. For now to
all of us it standeth on a razor’s edge, either pitiful ruin for the
Achaians, or life. But come now, if indeed thou dost pity me, rouse
swift Aias, and the son of Phyleus, for thou art younger than I.”

So spake he, and Diomedes cast round his shoulders the skin of a great
fiery lion, that reached to his feet, and he grasped his spear, and
started on his way, and roused the others from their place and led them
on.

Now when they had come among the assembled sentinels, they found not
the leaders of the sentinels asleep, but they all sat wide awake with
their arms. And even as hounds keep difficult guard round the sheep in
a fold, having heard a hardy wild beast that cometh through the wood
among the hills, and much clamour riseth round him of hounds and men,
and sleep perisheth from them, even so sweet sleep did perish from
their eyes, as they watched through the wicked night, for ever were
they turning toward the plains, when they heard the Trojans moving.

And that old man was glad when he saw them, and heartened them with his
saying, and calling out to them he spake winged words: “Even so now,
dear children, do ye keep watch, nor let sleep take any man, lest we
become a cause of rejoicing to them that hate us.”

So saying he sped through the moat, and they followed with him, the
kings of the Argives, who had been called to the council. And with them
went Meriones, and the glorious son of Nestor, for they called them to
share their counsel. So they went clean out of the delved foss, and sat
down in the open, where the mid-space was clear of dead men fallen,
where fierce Hector had turned again from destroying the Argives, when
night covered all. There sat they down, and declared their saying each
to the other, and to them knightly Nestor of Gerenia began discourse:
“O friends, is there then no man that would trust to his own daring
spirit, to go among the great-hearted Trojans, if perchance he might
take some straggler of the enemy, yea, or hear perchance some rumour
among the Trojans, and what things they devise among themselves,
whether they are fain to abide there by the ships, away from the city,
or will retreat again to the city, now that they have conquered the
Achaians? All this might such an one learn, and back to us come
scathless: great would be his fame under heaven among all men, and a
goodly gift will be given him. For all the best men that bear sway by
the ships, each and all of them will give him a black ewe, with her
lamb at her foot,—no chattel may compare with her,—and ever will he be
present at feasts and clan-drinkings.”

So spake he, and thereon were they all silent, holding their peace, but
to them spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry: “Nestor, my heart and
manful spirit urge me to enter the camp of the foemen hard by, even of
the Trojans: but and if some other man will follow with me, more
comfort and more courage will there be. If two go together, one before
another perceiveth a matter, how there may be gain therein; but if one
alone perceive aught, even so his wit is shorter, and weak his device.”

So spake he, and many were they that wished to follow Diomedes. The two
Aiantes were willing, men of Ares’ company, and Meriones was willing,
and right willing the son of Nestor, and the son of Atreus, Menelaos,
spearman renowned, yea and the hardy Odysseus was willing to steal into
the throng of Trojans, for always daring was his heart within him. But
among them spake the king of men, Agamemnon: “Diomedes son of Tydeus,
joy of mine heart, thy comrade verily shalt thou choose, whomsoever
thou wilt, the best of them that be here, for many are eager. But do
not thou, out of reverent heart, leave the better man behind, and give
thyself the worse companion, yielding to regard for any, and looking to
their lineage, even if one be more kingly born.”

So spake he, but was in fear for the sake of fair-haired Menelaos. But
to them again answered Diomedes of the loud war-cry: “If indeed ye bid
me choose myself a comrade, how then could I be unmindful of godlike
Odysseus, whose heart is passing eager, and his spirit so manful in all
manner of toils; and Pallas Athene loveth him. But while he cometh with
me, even out of burning fire might we both return, for he excelleth in
understanding.”

Then him again answered the steadfast noble Odysseus: “Son of Tydeus,
praise me not overmuch, neither blame me aught, for thou speakest thus
among the Argives that themselves know all. But let us be going, for
truly the night is waning, and near is the dawn, and the stars have
gone onward, and the night has advanced more than two watches, but the
third watch is yet left.”

So spake they, and harnessed them in their dread armour. To the son of
Tydeus did Thrasymedes steadfast in war give a two-edged sword (for his
own was left by his ship) and a shield, and about his head set a helm
of bull’s hide, without cone or crest, that is called a skull-cap, and
keeps the heads of stalwart youths. And Meriones gave Odysseus a bow
and a quiver, and a sword, and on his head set a helm made of leather,
and with many a thong was it stiffly wrought within, while without the
white teeth of a boar of flashing tusks were arrayed thick set on
either side, well and cunningly, and in the midst was fixed a cap of
felt. This casque Autolykos once stole from Amyntor son of Ormenos, out
of Eleon, breaking into his well-builded house; and he gave it to
Amphidamas of Kythera to take to Skandeia and Amphidamas gave it for a
guest-gift to Molos, who gave it to his own son Meriones to wear, and
now it was set to cover the head of Odysseus.

So when these twain had harnessed them in their dread armour, they set
forth to go, and left there all the best of the host. And to them did
Pallas Athene send forth an omen on the right, a heron hard by the way,
and they beheld it not with their eyes, through the dark night, but
they heard its shrill cry. And Odysseus was glad in the omen of the
bird, and prayed to Athene: “Listen to me, thou child of aegis-bearing
Zeus, that ever in all toils dost stand by me, nor doth any motion of
mine escape thee: but now again above all be thou friendly to me,
Athene, and grant that we come back with renown to the ships, having
wrought a great work, that shall be sorrow to the Trojans.”

Next again prayed Diomedes of the loud war-cry: “Listen now likewise to
me, thou child of Zeus, unwearied maiden, and follow with me as when
with my father thou didst follow, even noble Tydeus, into Thebes, when
he went forth as a messenger from the Achaians. And them he left by the
Asopos, the mail-clad Achaians, and a honeyed word he bare to the
Kadmeians in that place; but on his backward way he devised right
terrible deeds, with thee, fair goddess, for eager didst thou stand by
him. Even so now stand thou by me willingly, and protect me. And to
thee will I sacrifice a yearling heifer, broad of brow, unbroken, that
never yet hath man led below the yoke. Her will I sacrifice to thee,
and gild her horns with gold.”

So spake they in their prayer, and Pallas Athene heard them. And when
they had prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus, they went forth on
their way, like two lions, through the dark night, amid the slaughter,
amid the slain men, through the arms and the black blood.

Nay, nor the stout-hearted Trojans did Hector suffer to sleep, but he
called together all the best of them, all that were chiefs and leaders
of the Trojans, them did he call together, and contrived a crafty
counsel: “Who is there that would promise and perform for me this deed,
for a great gift? yea his reward shall be sufficient. For I will give
him a chariot, and two horses of arching neck, the best that be at the
swift ships of the Achaians, to whosoever shall dare the deed, and for
himself shall win glory. And the deed is this; to go near the
swift-faring ships, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded,
as of old, or whether already, being subdued beneath our hands, the
foes are devising of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch
through the night, being fordone with dread weariness.”

So spake he, but they were all silent and held their peace. Now there
was among the Trojans one Dolon, the son of Eumedes the godlike herald,
and he was rich in gold, and rich in bronze: and verily he was ill
favoured to look upon, but swift of foot; now he was an only son among
five sisters. So he spake then a word to the Trojans and to Hector:
“Hector, my heart and manful spirit urge me to go near the swift-faring
ships, and spy out all. But come, I pray thee, hold up the staff, and
swear to me, that verily thou wilt give me the horses and the chariots
bedight with bronze that bear the noble son of Peleus. But to thee I
will prove no vain spy, nor disappoint thy hope. For I will go straight
to the camp, until I may come to the ship of Agamemnon, where surely
the chiefs are like to hold council, whether to fight or flee.”

So spake he, and Hector took the staff in his hand, and sware to him:
“Now let Zeus himself be witness, the loud-thundering lord of Hera,
that no other man of the Trojans shall mount those horses, but thou, I
declare, shalt rejoice in them for ever.”

So spake he, and sware a bootless oath thereto, and aroused Dolon to
go. And straightway he cast on his shoulders his crooked bow, and did
on thereover the skin of a grey wolf, and on his head a helm of
ferret-skin, and took a sharp javelin, and went on his way to the ships
from the host. But he was not like to come back from the ships and
bring word to Hector.

But when he had left the throng of men and horses, he went forth
eagerly on the way, and Odysseus of the seed of Zeus was ware of him as
he approached, and said unto Diomedes: “Lo, here is some man, Diomedes,
coming from the camp, I know not whether as a spy to our ships, or to
strip certain of the dead men fallen. But let us suffer him to pass by
us a little way on the plain, and thereafter may we rush on him and
take him speedily, and if it chance that he outrun us by speed of foot,
ever do thou hem him in towards the ships and away from the camp,
rushing on him with thy spear, lest in any wise he escape towards the
city.”

So they spake, and turning out of the path they lay down among the
bodies of the dead; and swiftly Dolon ran past them in his witlessness.
But when he was as far off as is the length of the furrow made by
mules, (for better far are they than kine, tho drag the jointed plough
through the deep fallow,) these twain ran after him, and he stood still
when he heard the sound, supposing in his heart that they were friends
come from among the Trojans to turn him back, at the countermand of
Hector. But when they were about a spear-cast off, or even less, he
knew them for foemen, and stirred his swift limbs to fly, and speedily
they started in pursuit.

And as when two sharp-toothed hounds, well skilled in the chase, press
ever hard on a doe or a hare through a wooded land, and it runs
screaming before them, even so Tydeus’ son and Odysseus the sacker of
cities cut Dolon off from the host, and ever pursued hard after him.
But when he was just about to come among the sentinels, in his flight
towards the ships, then Athene poured strength into the son of Tydeus,
that none of the mail-clad Achaians might boast himself the first to
smite, and he come second. And strong Diomedes leaped upon him with the
spear, and said: “Stand, or I shall overtake thee with the spear, and
methinks that thou shalt not long avoid sheer destruction at my hand.”

So spake he, and threw his spear, but of his own will he missed the
man, and passing over his right shoulder the point of the polished
spear stuck fast in the ground: and Dolon stood still, in great dread
and trembling, and the teeth chattered in his mouth, and he was green
with fear. Then the twain came up with him, panting, and gripped his
hands, and weeping he spake: “Take me alive, and I will ransom myself,
for within our house there is bronze, and gold, and smithied iron,
wherefrom my father would do you grace with ransom untold, if he should
learn that I am alive among the ships of the Achaians.”

Then Odysseus of the many counsels answered him and said: “Take
courage, let not death be in thy mind, but come speak and tell me truly
all the tale, why thus from the host lost thou come all alone among the
ships, through the black night, when other mortals are sleeping? Comest
thou to strip certain of the dead men fallen, or did Hector send thee
forth to spy out everything at the hollow ships, or did thine own
spirit urge thee on?”

Then Dolon answered him, his limbs trembling beneath him: “With many a
blind hope did Hector lead my wits astray, who vowed to give me the
whole-hooved horses of the proud son of Peleus, and his car bedight
with bronze: and he bade me fare through the swift black night, and
draw nigh the foemen, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded,
as of old, or whether, already, being subdued beneath our hands, they
are devising of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch
through the night, being fordone with dread weariness.”

And smiling thereat did Odysseus of the many counsels make him answer:
“Verily now thy soul was set on great rewards, even the horses of the
wise son of Aiakos, but hard are they for mortal men to master, and
hard to drive, for any but Achilles only, whom a deathless mother bare.
But come, tell me all this truly, all the tale: where when thou camest
hither didst thou leave Hector, shepherd of the host, and where lie his
warlike gear, and where his horses? And how are disposed the watches,
and the beds of the other Trojans? And what counsel take they among
themselves; are they fain to abide there nigh the ships, afar from the
city, or will they return to the city again, seeing that they have
subdued unto them the Achaians?”

Then Dolon son of Eumedes made him answer again: “Lo, now all these
things will I recount to thee most truly. Hector with them that are
counsellors holdeth council by the barrow of godlike Ilos, apart from
the din, but as for the guards whereof thou askest, oh hero, no chosen
watch nor guard keepeth the host. As for all the watch fires of the
Trojans—on them is necessity, so that they watch and encourage each
other to keep guard; but, for the allies called from many lands, they
are sleeping and to the Trojans they leave it to keep watch, for no
wise near dwell the children and wives of the allies.”

Then Odysseus of the many counsels answered him and said: “How stands
it now, do they sleep amidst the horse-taming Trojans, or apart? tell
me clearly, that I may know.”

Then answered him Dolon son of Eumedes: “Verily all this likewise will
I recount to thee truly. Towards the sea lie the Karians, and Paionians
of the bended bow, and the Leleges and Kaukones, and noble Pelasgoi.
And towards Thymbre the Lykians have their place, and the haughty
Mysians, and the Phrygians that fight from chariots, and Maionians
lords of chariots. But wherefore do ye inquire of me throughly
concerning all these things? for if ye desire to steal into the throng
of Trojans, lo, there be those Thracians, new comers, at the furthest
point apart from the rest, and among them their king Rhesos, son of
Eïoneus. His be the fairest horses that ever I beheld, and the
greatest, whiter than snow, and for speed like the winds. And his
chariot is fashioned well with gold and silver, and golden is his
armour that he brought with him, marvellous, a wonder to behold; such
as it is in no wise fit for mortal men to bear, but for the deathless
gods. But bring me now to the swift ships, or leave me here, when ye
have bound me with a ruthless bond, that ye may go and make trial of me
whether I have spoken to you truth, or lies.”

Then strong Diomedes, looking grimly on him, said: “Put no thought of
escape, Dolon, in thy heart, for all the good tidings thou hast
brought, since once thou hast come into our hands. For if now we
release thee or let thee go, on some later day wilt thou come to the
swift ships of the Achaians, either to play the spy, or to fight in
open war, but if subdued beneath my hands thou lose thy life, never
again wilt thou prove a bane to the Argives.”

He spake, and that other with strong hand was about to touch his chin,
and implore his mercy, but Diomedes smote him on the midst of the neck,
rushing on him with the sword, and cut through both the sinews, and the
head of him still speaking was mingled with the dust. And they stripped
him of the casque of ferret’s skin from off his head, and of his
wolf-skin, and his bended bow, and his long spear, and these to Athene
the Giver of Spoil did noble Odysseus hold aloft in his hand, and he
prayed and spake a word: “Rejoice, O goddess, in these, for to thee
first of all the Immortals in Olympus will we call for aid; nay, but
yet again send us on against the horses and the sleeping places of the
Thracian men.”

So spake he aloud, and lifted from him the spoils on high, and set them
on a tamarisk bush, and raised thereon a mark right plain to see,
gathering together reeds, and luxuriant shoots of tamarisk, lest they
should miss the place as they returned again through the swift dark
night.

So the twain went forward through the arms, and the black blood, and
quickly they came to the company of Thracian men. Now they were
slumbering, fordone with toil, but their goodly weapons lay by them on
the ground, all orderly, in three rows, and by each man his pair of
steeds. And Rhesos slept in the midst, and beside him his swift horses
were bound with thongs to the topmost rim of the chariot. Him Odysseus
spied from afar, and showed him unto Diomedes: “Lo, Diomedes, this is
the man, and these are the horses whereof Dolon that we slew did give
us tidings. But come now, put forth thy great strength; it doth not
behove thee to stand idle with thy weapons: nay, loose the horses; or
do thou slay the men, and of the horses will I take heed.”

So spake he, and into that other bright-eyed Athene breathed might, and
he began slaying on this side and on that, and hideously went up their
groaning, as they were smitten with the sword, and the earth was
reddened with blood. And like as a lion cometh on flocks without a
herdsman, on goats or sheep, and leaps upon them with evil will, so set
the son of Tydeus on the men of Thrace, till he had slain twelve. But
whomsoever the son of Tydeus drew near and smote with the sword, him
did Odysseus of the many counsels seize by the foot from behind, and
drag him out of the way, with this design in his heart, that the
fair-maned horses might lightly issue forth, and not tremble in spirit,
when they trod over the dead; for they were not yet used to dead men.
But when the son of Tydeus came upon the king, he was the thirteenth
from whom he took sweet life away, as he was breathing hard, for an
evil dream stood above his head that night, even the seed of Oineus,
through the device of Athene. Meanwhile the hardy Odysseus loosed the
whole-hooved horses, and bound them together with thongs, and drave
them out of the press, smiting them with his bow, since he had not
taken thought to lift the shining whip with his hands from the
well-dight chariot: then he whistled for a sign to noble Diomedes.

But Diomedes stood and pondered what most daring deed he might do,
whether he should take the chariot, where lay the fair-dight armour,
and drag it out by the pole, or lift it upon high, and so bear it
forth, or whether he should take the life away from yet more of the
Thracians. And while he was pondering this in his heart, then Athene
drew near, and stood, and spake to noble Diomedes: “Bethink thee of
returning, O son of great-hearted Tydeus, to the hollow ships, lest
perchance thou come thither in flight, and perchance another god rouse
up the Trojans likewise.”

So spake she, and he observed the voice of the utterance of the
goddess, and swiftly he sprang upon the steeds, and Odysseus smote them
with his bow, and they sped to the swift ships of the Achaians.

Nay, nor a vain watch kept Apollo of the silver bow, when he beheld
Athene caring for the son of Tydeus; in wrath against her he stole
among the crowded press of Trojans, and aroused a counsellor of the
Thracians, Hippokoon, the noble kinsman of Rhesos. And he started out
of sleep, when he beheld the place desolate where the swift horses had
stood, and beheld the men gasping in the death struggle; then he
groaned aloud, and called out by name to his comrade dear. And a
clamour arose and din unspeakable of the Trojans hasting together, and
they marvelled at the terrible deeds, even all that the heroes had
wrought, and had gone thereafter to the hollow ships.

But when those others came to the place where they had slain the spy of
Hector, there Odysseus, dear to Zeus, checked the swift horses, and
Tydeus’ son, leaping to the ground, set the bloody spoil in the hands
of Odysseus, and again mounted, and lashed the horses, and they sped
onward nothing loth. [to the hollow ships, for there they fain would
be]. But Nestor first heard the sound, and said: “O friends, leaders
and counsellors of the Argives, shall I be wrong or speak sooth? for my
heart bids me speak. The sound of swift-footed horses strikes upon mine
ears. Would to god that Odysseus and that strong Diomedes may even
instantly be driving the whole-hooved horses from among the Trojans;
but terribly I fear in mine heart lest the bravest of the Argives
suffer aught through the Trojans’ battle din.”

Not yet was his whole word spoken, when they came themselves, and
leaped down to earth, but gladly the others welcomed them with
hand-clasping, and with honeyed words. And first did knightly Nestor of
Gerenia make question: “Come, tell me now, renowned Odysseus, great
glory of the Achaians, how ye twain took those horses? Was it by
stealing into the press of Trojans? Or did some god meet you, and give
you them? Wondrous like are they to rays of the sun. Ever with the
Trojans do I mix in fight, nor methinks do I tarry by the ships, old
warrior as I am. But never yet saw I such horses, nor deemed of such.
Nay, methinks some god must have encountered you and given you these.
For both of you doth Zeus the cloud-gatherer love, and the maiden of
aegis-bearing Zeus, bright-eyed Athene.”

And him answered Odysseus of the many counsels: “O Nestor, son of
Neleus, great glory of the Achaians, lightly could a god, if so he
would, give even better steeds than these, for the gods are far
stronger than we. But as for these new come horses, whereof, old man,
thou askest me, they are Thracian, but their lord did brave Diomedes
slay, and beside him all the twelve best men of his company. The
thirteenth man was a spy we took near the ships, one that Hector and
the other haughty Trojans sent forth to pry upon our camp.”

So spake he, and drave the whole-hooved horses through the fosse,
laughing; and the other Achaians went with him joyfully. But when they
had come to the well-built hut of the son of Tydeus, they bound the
horses with well-cut thongs, at the mangers where the swift horses of
Diomedes stood eating honey-sweet barley.

And Odysseus placed the bloody spoils of Dolon in the stern of the
ship, that they might make ready a sacred offering to Athene. But for
themselves, they went into the sea, and washed off the thick sweat from
shins, and neck, and thighs. But when the wave of the sea had washed
the thick sweat from their skin, and their hearts revived again, they
went into polished baths, and were cleansed.

And when they had washed, and anointed them with olive oil, they sat
down at supper, and from the full mixing bowl they drew off the
honey-sweet wine, and poured it forth to Athene.




BOOK XI.


Despite the glorious deeds of Agamemnon, the Trojans press hard on the
Achaians, and the beginning of evil comes on Patroklos.


Now Dawn arose from her couch beside proud Tithonos, to bring light to
the Immortals and to mortal men. But Zeus sent forth fierce Discord
unto the fleet ships of the Achaians, and in her hands she held the
signal of war. And she stood upon the huge black ship of Odysseus, that
was in the midst, to make her voice heard on either side, both to the
huts of Aias, son of Telamon, and to the huts of Achilles, for these
twain, trusting in their valour and the might of their hands, had drawn
up their trim ships at the two ends of the line. There stood the
goddess and cried shrilly in a great voice and terrible, and mighty
strength she set in the heart of each of the Achaians, to war and fight
unceasingly. And straightway to them war grew sweeter than to depart in
the hollow ships to their dear native land.

Then the son of Atreus cried aloud, and bade the Argives arm them, and
himself amid them did on the flashing bronze. First he fastened fair
greaves about his legs, fitted with ankle-clasps of silver; next again
he did his breastplate about his breast, the breastplate that in time
past Kinyras gave him for a guest-gift. For afar in Cyprus did Kinyras
hear the mighty rumour how that the Achaians were about to sail forth
to Troy in their ships, wherefore did Kinyras give him the breastplate,
to do pleasure to the king. Now therein were ten courses of black
cyanus, and twelve of gold, and twenty of tin, and dark blue snakes
writhed up towards the neck, three on either side, like rainbows that
the son of Kronos hath set in the clouds, a marvel of the mortal tribes
of men. And round his shoulders he cast his sword, wherein shone studs
of gold, but the scabbard about it was silver, fitted with golden
chains. And he took the richly-dight shield of his valour that covereth
all the body of a man, a fair shield, and round about it were ten
circles of bronze, and thereon were twenty white bosses of tin, and one
in the midst of black cyanus. And thereon was embossed the Gorgon fell
of aspect glaring terribly, and about her were Dread and Terror. And
from the shield was hung a baldric of silver, and thereon was curled a
snake of cyanus; three heads interlaced had he, growing out of one
neck. And on his head Agamemnon set a two-crested helm with fourfold
plate, and plume of horse-hair, and terribly the crest nodded from
above. And he grasped two strong spears, shod with bronze and keen, and
far forth from him into the heaven shone the bronze; and thereat Hera
and Athene thundered, honouring the king of Mykene rich in gold.

Then each man gave in charge his horses to his charioteer, to hold them
in by the fosse, well and orderly, and themselves as heavy men at arms
were hasting about, being harnessed in their gear, and unquenchable the
cry arose into the Dawn. And long before the charioteers were they
arrayed at the fosse, but after them a little way came up the drivers.
And among them the son of Kronos aroused an evil din, and from above
rained down dew danked with blood out of the upper air, for that he was
about to send many strong men down to Hades.

But the Trojans on the other side, on the high ground of the plain,
gathered them around great Hector, and noble Polydamus, and Aineias
that as a god was honoured by the people of the Trojans, and the three
sons of Antenor, Polybos, and noble Agenor, and young Akamas like unto
the Immortals. And Hector in the foremost rank bare the circle of his
shield. And as from amid the clouds appeareth glittering a baneful
star, and then again sinketh within the shadowy clouds, even so Hector
would now appear among the foremost ranks, and again would be giving
command in the rear, and all in bronze he shone, like the lightning of
aegis-bearing father Zeus.

And even as when reapers over against each other drive their swaths
through a rich man’s field of wheat or barley, and thick fall the
handfuls, even so the Trojans and Achaians leaped upon each other,
destroying, and neither side took thought of ruinous flight; and equal
heads had the battle, and they rushed on like wolves. And woful Discord
was glad at the sight, for she alone of the gods was with them in the
war; for the other gods were not beside them, but in peace they sat
within their halls, where the goodly mansion of each was builded in the
folds of Olympus. And they all were blaming the son of Kronos, lord of
the storm-cloud, for that he willed to give glory to the Trojans. But
of them took the father no heed, but aloof from the others he sat
apart, glad in his glory, looking toward the city of the Trojans, and
the ships of the Achaians, and the glitter of bronze, and the slayers
and the slain.

So long as morning was, and the sacred day still waxed, so long did the
shafts of both hosts strike, and the folk fell, but about the hour when
a woodman maketh ready his meal, in the dells of a mountain, when he
hath tired his hands with felling tall trees, and weariness cometh on
his soul, and desire of sweet food taketh his heart, even then the
Danaans by their valour brake the battalions, and called on their
comrades through the lines. And in rushed Agamemnon first of all, and
slew a man, even Bienor, shepherd of the hosts, first himself, and next
his comrade Oïleus, the charioteer. He verily leaped from the chariot
and stood and faced Agamemnon, but the king smote the brow of him with
the sharp spear as he came eagerly on, and his vizor heavy with bronze
held not off the spear, but through vizor and bone it sped, and the
brain within was all scattered, and so was Oïleus overcome despite his
eagerness.

And them did Agamemnon king of men leave in that place, with their
breasts gleaming, when he had stripped them of their corslets, and he
went on to destroy Isos and Antiphos, two sons of Priam, one born in
wedlock, the other a bastard, and both were in one chariot: the bastard
held the reins, but renowned Antiphos was fighting by him. These twain
did Achilles on the spurs of Ida once bind with fresh withes, taking
them as they herded the sheep, and he ransomed them for a price. But
now Agamemnon, son of Atreus, of the wide domain, smote Isos on the
breast, above the nipple, with his spear, but Antiphos he struck hard
by the ear, with the sword, and dashed him from the chariot. Then made
he haste, and stripped from them their goodly harness, well knowing who
they were, for he had seen them before beside the fleet ships when
swift-footed Achilles led them from Ida. And as a lion easily crusheth
the young fawns of a swift hind, when that he hath seized them in his
strong teeth, and hath come to their lair, and taketh their tender life
away,—and the hind, even if she chance to be near at hand, cannot help
them, for on herself too cometh dread terror, and swiftly she speedeth
through the thick coppice and the woodland, hasting and sweating before
the onslaught of the mighty beast,—even so not one of the Trojans did
avail to save them from their bane, but themselves were fleeing in fear
before the Argives.

Next took he Peisandros and Hippolochos, steadfast in fight. These were
sons of wise-hearted Antimachos, who chiefly had taken the gold of
Alexandros, goodly gifts, and therefore never would consent to give
Helen to fair-haired Menelaos. His two sons then lord Agamemnon took,
both being in one car, and together they were driving the swift steeds;
for the shining reins had fallen from their hands, and the horses were
all distraught with dread, and he set on against them, like a
lion,—even the son of Atreus,—but from their chariot the twain did
supplicate him: “Take us alive, O son of Atreus, and receive worthy
ransom, for in the halls of Antimachos lie many possessions, bronze,
and gold, and smithied iron; out of these could our father do thee
grace with ransom past telling, if he heard that we twain were alive by
the ships of the Achaians.”

So did the twain weeping beseech the king with soft words, but they
heard a voice wherein was no softness at all: “If indeed ye be the sons
of wise Antimachos, who once in the assembly of the Trojans bade slay
Menelaos there, when he came on an embassy with godlike Odysseus, nor
ever let him return to the Achaians, now verily shall ye pay the price
of your father’s foul shame.”

He spake and dashed Peisandros from his chariot to the earth, smiting
him with the spear upon the breast, and he lay supine on the ground.
But Hippolochos rushed away, and him too he smote to earth, and cut off
his arms and his neck with the sword, then tossed him like a ball of
stone to roll through the throng. Then left he them, and where thickest
clashed the battalions, there he set on, and with him all the
well-greaved Achaians. Footmen kept slaying footmen as they were driven
in flight, and horsemen slaying horsemen with the sword, and from
beneath them rose up the dust from the plain, stirred by the thundering
hooves of horses. And the lord Agamemnon, ever slaying, followed after,
calling on the Argives. And as when ruinous fire falleth on dense
woodland, and the whirling wind beareth it everywhere, and the thickets
fall utterly before it, being smitten by the onset of the fire, even so
beneath Agamemnon son of Atreus fell the heads of the Trojans as they
fled; and many strong-necked horses rattled empty cars along the
highways of the battle, lacking their noble charioteers; but they on
the earth were lying, far more dear to the vultures than to their
wives.

But Hector did Zeus draw forth from the darts and the dust, from the
man-slaying, and the blood, and the din, and the son of Atreus followed
on, crying eagerly to the Danaans. And past the tomb of ancient Ilos,
son of Dardanos, across the mid plain, past the place of the wild
fig-tree they sped, making for the city, and ever the son of Atreus
followed shouting, and his invincible hands were defiled with gore. But
when they were come to the Skaian gates, and the oak-tree, there then
they halted, and awaited each other. But some were still in full flight
through the mid plain, like kine that a lion hath scattered, coming on
them in the dead of night; all hath he scattered, but to one sheer
death appeareth instantly, and he breaketh her neck first, seizing her
with strong teeth, and thereafter swalloweth greedily the blood and all
the guts; even so lord Agamemnon son of Atreus followed hard on the
Trojans, ever slaying the hindmost man, and they were scattered in
flight, and on face or back many of them fell from their chariots
beneath the hands of Agamemnon, for mightily he raged with the spear.
But when he was now about coming below the city, and the steep wall,
then did the father of men and gods sit him down on the crests of
many-fountained Ida, from heaven descending, with the thunderbolt in
his hands.

Then sent he forth Iris of the golden wings, to bear his word: “Up and
go, swift Iris, and tell this word unto Hector: So long as he sees
Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, raging among the foremost fighters,
and ruining the ranks of men, so long let him hold back, but bid the
rest of the host war with the foe in strong battle. But when, or
smitten with the spear or wounded with arrow shot, Agamemnon leapeth
into his chariot, then will I give Hector strength to slay till he come
even to the well-timbered ships, and the sun go down, and sacred
darkness draw on.”

So spake he, and wind-footed swift Iris disobeyed him not, but she went
down from the hills of Ida to sacred Ilios, and she found the son of
wise-hearted Priam, noble Hector, standing among the horses, and
firm-bound chariots, and swift-footed Iris drew near and spake to him:
“Hector, son of Priam, peer of Zeus in counsel; lo, Zeus the father
hath sent me forth, to bear thee this command: So long as thou seest
Agamemnon, the shepherd of the host, raging among the foremost
fighters, and ruining the ranks of men, so long hold back from the
fight, but bid the rest of the host war with the foe in strong battle.
But when, or smitten with the spear or wounded with arrow shot,
Agamemnon leapeth into his chariot, then will Zeus give thee strength
to slay till thou come even to the well-timbered ships, and the sun go
down and sacred darkness draw on.”

So spake swift-footed Iris and departed, but Hector with his harness
leaped from the chariot to the ground, and, shaking his sharp spears
went through all the host, stirring up his men to fight, and he roused
the dread din of battle. And they wheeled round, and stood and faced
the Achaians, while the Argives on the other side strengthened their
battalions. And battle was made ready, and they stood over against each
other, and Agamemnon first rushed in, being eager to fight far in front
of all.

Tell me now, ye Muses that inhabit mansions in Olympus, who was he that
first encountered Agamemnon, whether of the Trojans themselves, or of
their allies renowned? It was Iphidamas, son of Antenor, great and
mighty, who was nurtured in Thrace rich of soil, the mother of sheep,
and Kisses his mother’s father reared him in the halls, while he was
but a little child,—even the father of Theano fair of face. Then when
he came to the measure of glorious youth, he tried to keep him there,
and offered him his own daughter; but a bridegroom new wed, he went
from his bridal chamber after the tidings of the coming of the
Achaians, with twelve beaked ships that followed after him. These trim
ships he left in Perkote, but himself came by land to Ilios; he it was
that then encountered Agamemnon son of Atreus. And when they were come
near in onset against each other, Atreus’ son missed, and his spear was
turned aside, but Iphidamas smote him on the girdle, below the corslet,
and himself pressed on, trusting to his heavy hand, but pierced not the
gleaming girdle, for long ere that the point struck on the silver, and
was bent like lead. Then wide-ruling Agamemnon caught the spear with
his hand and drew it toward him furiously, like a lion, and snatched it
out of the hand of Iphidamas, and smote his neck with the sword, and
unstrung his limbs. So even there he fell, and slept a sleep of bronze
most piteously, far from his wedded wife, helping the folk of the
city,—far from his bride, of whom he had known no joy, and much had he
given for her: first a hundred kine he gave, and thereafter promised a
thousand, goats and sheep together, whereof he had herds unspeakable.
Then did Agamemnon son of Atreus strip him, and went bearing his goodly
harness into the throng of the Achaians.

Now when Koön beheld him, Koön Antenor’s eldest son, illustrious among
men, strong sorrow came on him, covering his eyes, for his brother’s
fall: and he stood on one side with his spear, and unmarked of noble
Agamemnon smote him on the mid-arm, beneath the elbow, and clean
through went the point of the shining spear. Then Agamemnon king of men
shuddered, yet not even so did he cease from battle and war, but rushed
against Koön, grasping his wind-nurtured spear. Verily then Koön seized
right lustily by the foot Iphidamas, his brother, and his father’s son,
and called to all the best of his men; but him, as he dragged the dead
through the press, beneath his bossy shield Agamemnon wounded with a
bronze-shod spear, and unstrung his limbs, and drew near and cut off
his head over Iphidamas. There the sons of Antenor, at the hands of
Agamemnon the king, filled up the measure of their fate, and went down
within the house of Hades.

But Agamemnon ranged among the ranks of men, with spear, and sword, and
great stones for throwing, while yet the blood welled warm from his
wound. But when the wound waxed dry, and the blood ceased to flow, then
keen pangs came on the might of the son of Atreus. And even as when the
keen shaft cometh upon a woman in her travail, the piercing shaft that
the goddesses of the birth-pangs send, even the Eilithyiai, the
daughters of Hera that have hitter pangs in their gift, even so keen
pains sank into the might of the son of Atreus. Then leaped he into his
chariot, and bade his charioteer drive to the hollow ships, for he was
sore vexed at heart. And he called in a piercing voice, and shouted to
the Danaans: “O friends, leaders and counsellors of the Argives, do ye
now ward from the seafaring ships the harsh din of battle, for Zeus the
counsellor suffers me not all day to war with the Trojans.”

So spake he, and his charioteer lashed the fair-maned steeds toward the
hollow ships, and they flew onward nothing loth, and their breasts were
covered with foam, and their bellies were stained with dust, as they
bore the wounded king away from the war.

But Hector, when he beheld Agamemnon departed, cried to the Trojans and
Lykians with a loud shout: “Ye Trojans and Lykians, and Dardanians that
war in close fight, be men, my friends, and be mindful of your
impetuous valour. The best man of them hath departed and to me hath
Zeus, the son of Kronos, given great renown. But straightway drive ye
the whole-hooved horses against the mighty Danaans, that ye may be the
masters and bear away the higher glory.”

So spake he, and aroused the might and spirit of every man. And even as
when some hunter tars on his white-toothed hounds against a boar of the
wild, or a lion, even so did Hector, son of Priam, like unto Ares the
bane of men, tar on the great-hearted Trojans against the Achaians.
Himself with high thoughts he fared among the foremost, and fell upon
the fight; like a roaring blast, that leapeth down and stirreth the
violet-coloured deep. There whom first, whom last did he slay, even
Hector, son of Priam, when Zeus vouchsafed him renown?

Asaios first, and Autonoos, and Opites, and Dolops, son of Klytios, and
Opheltios, and Agelaos, and Aisymnos, and Oros, and Hipponoos steadfast
in the fight; these leaders of the Danaans he slew, and thereafter
smote the multitude, even as when the West Wind driveth the clouds of
the white South Wind, smiting with deep storm, and the wave swelleth
huge, rolling onward, and the spray is scattered on high beneath the
rush of the wandering wind; even so many heads of the host were smitten
by Hector.

There had ruin begun, and deeds remedeless been wrought, and now would
all the Achaians have fled and fallen among the ships, if Odysseus had
not called to Diomedes, son of Tydeus: “Tydeus’ son, what ails us that
we forget our impetuous valour? Nay, come hither, friend, and take thy
stand by me, for verily it will be shame if Hector of the glancing helm
take the ships.”

And to him strong Diomedes spake in answer: “Verily will I abide and
endure, but short will be all our profit, for Zeus, the cloud-gatherer,
clearly desireth to give victory to the Trojans rather than to us.”

He spake, and drave Thymbraios from his chariot to the ground, smiting
him with the spear in the left breast, and Odysseus smote Molion the
god-like squire of that prince. These then they let be, when they had
made them cease from war, and then the twain fared through the crowd
with a din, as when two boars full of valour fall on the hunting
hounds; so rushed they on again, and slew the Trojans, while gladly the
Achaians took breath again in their flight from noble Hector.

There took they a chariot and two of the best men of the people, two
sons of Merops of Perkote, who above all men was skilled in
soothsaying, nor would he suffer his children to go to ruinous war; but
in nowise did the twain obey him, for the Fates of black death led them
on. Them did the son of Tydeus, Diomedes, spearman renowned, deprive of
life and spirit, and took away their glorious harness. And Odysseus
stripped Hippodamos and Hypeirochos. Then Kronion stretched for them
the line of battle level, as he looked down from Ida, and they kept
slaying each other. Then Tydeus’ son smote the hero Agastrophos, son of
Paion, on the hip-joint, with his spear; nor were his horses near, for
him to flee, and great blindness was on his spirit; for the squire held
them aloof, but on foot he was charging through the foremost fighters,
till he lost his life. But Hector quickly spied them among the ranks,
and rushed upon them shouting, and with him followed the battalions of
the Trojans. And beholding him, Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered,
and straightway spake to Odysseus that was hard by: “Lo, on us this
ruin, even mighty Hector, is rolling: let us stand, and await him, and
ward off his onset.”

So spake he, and swayed and sent forth his far-shadowing spear, and
smote him nor missed, for he aimed at the head, on the summit of the
crest, and bronze by bronze was turned, nor reached his fair flesh, for
it was stopped by the threefold helm with its socket, that Phoebus
Apollo to Hector gave. But Hector sprang back a wondrous way, and
mingled with the throng, and he rested, fallen on his knee, and leaned
on the ground with his stout hand, and dark night veiled his eyes.

But while Tydeus’ son was following after his spear-cast, far through
the foremost fighters, where he saw it sink into the earth, Hector gat
breath again, and leaping back into his chariot drave out into the
throng, and avoided black Fate. Then rushing on with his spear mighty
Diomedes spake to him: “Dog, thou art now again escaped from death; yet
came ill very nigh thee: but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to
whom thou must surely pray when thou goest amid the clash of spears.
Verily I will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any god is
helper of me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I may
seize.”

So spake he, and stripped the son of Paeon, spearman renowned. But
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, aimed with his arrows at
Tydeides, shepherd of the host; leaning as he aimed against a pillar on
the barrow, by men fashioned, of Ilos, son of Dardanos, an elder of the
people in time gone by. Now Diomedes was stripping the shining corslet
of strong Agastrophos from about his breast, and the shield from his
shoulders, and his strong helmet, when Paris drew the centre of his
bow; nor vainly did the shaft fly from his hand, for he smote the flat
of the right foot of Diomedes, and the arrow went clean through, and
stood fixed in the earth; and right sweetly laughing Paris leaped up
from his lair, and boasted, and said: “Thou art smitten, nor vainly
hath the dart flown forth; would that I had smitten thee in the nether
belly, and taken thy life away. So should the Trojans have breathed
again from their trouble, they that shudder at thee, as bleating goats
at a lion.”

But him answered strong Diomedes, no wise dismayed: “Bowman, reviler,
proud in thy bow of horn*, thou gaper after girls, verily if thou
madest trial in full harness, man to man, thy bow and showers of shafts
would nothing avail thee, but now thou boastest vainly, for that thou
hast grazed the sole of my foot. I care not, more than if a woman had
struck me or a senseless boy, for feeble is the dart of a craven man
and a worthless. In other wise from my hand, yea, if it do but touch,
the sharp shaft flieth, and straightway layeth low its man, and torn
are the cheeks of his wife, and fatherless his children, and he,
reddening the earth with his blood, doth rot away, more birds than
women round him.”

* Or, rather, “resplendent with thy lovelock.”


So spake he, and Odysseus, spearman renowned, drew near, and stood in
front of him, and Diomedes sat down behind him, and drew the sharp
arrow from his foot, and a sore pang passed through his flesh. Then
sprang he into his car, and bade his charioteer drive back to the
hollow ships, for he was hurt at heart. Then Odysseus, spearman
renowned, was left alone, nor did one of the Argives abide by him, for
fear had fallen on them all. Then in heaviness he spoke to his own
great-hearted spirit: “Ah me, what thing shall befall me! A great evil
it is if I flee, in dread of the throng; yet worse is this, if I be
taken all alone, for the other Danaans hath Kronion scattered in
flight. But wherefore doth my heart thus converse with herself? for I
know that they are cowards, who flee the fight, but whosoever is a hero
in war, him it mainly behoves to stand stubbornly, whether he be
smitten, or whether he smite another.”

While he pondered thus in heart and spirit, the ranks came on of the
Trojans under shield, and hemmed him in the midst, setting among them
their own bane. And even as when hounds and young men in their bloom
press round a boar, and he cometh forth from his deep lair, whetting
his white tusk between crooked jaws, and round him they rush, and the
sound of the gnashing of tusks ariseth, and straightway they await his
assault, so dread as he is, even so then round Odysseus, dear to Zeus,
rushed the Trojans. And first he wounded noble Deïopites, from above,
in the shoulder, leaping on him with sharp spear, and next he slew
Thoon and Ennomos, and next Chersidamas, being leapt down from his
chariot, he smote with the spear on the navel beneath the bossy shield,
and he fell in the dust and clutched the ground with the hollow of his
hand. These left he, and wounded Charops, son of Hippasos, with the
spear, the brother of high-born Sokos. And to help him came Sokos, a
godlike man, and stood hard by him, and spake saying: “O renowned
Odysseus, insatiable of craft and toil, to-day shalt thou either boast
over two sons of Hippasos, as having slain two such men of might, and
stripped their harness, or smitten by my spear shalt lose thy life.”

So spake he, and smote him on the circle of his shield; through the
shining shield passed the strong spear, and through the fair-dight
corslet it was thrust, and tore clean off the flesh of the flanks, but
Pallas Athene did not suffer it to mingle with the bowels of the hero,
and Odysseus knew that the dart had in nowise lighted on a deadly spot,
and drawing backward, he spake unto Sokos: “Ah, wretched one, verily
sheer destruction is come upon thee. Surely thou hast made me to cease
from warring among the Trojans, but here to thee I declare that slaying
and black Fate will be upon thee this day, and beneath my spear
overthrown shalt thou give glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the
noble steeds.”

He spake, and the other turned, and started to flee, and in his back as
he turned he fixed the spear, between the shoulders, and drave it
through the breast. Then he fell with a crash, and noble Odysseus
boasted over him: “Ah, Sokos, son of wise-hearted Hippasos the tamer of
horses, the end of death hath come upon and caught thee, nor hast thou
avoided. Ah, wretch, thy father and lady mother shall not close thine
eyes in death, but birds that eat flesh raw shall tear thee, shrouding
thee in the multitude of their wings. But to me, if I die, the noble
Achaians will yet give due burial.”

So spake he, and drew the mighty spear of wise-hearted Sokos forth from
his flesh, and from his bossy shield, and his blood flowed forth when
the spear was drawn away, and afflicted his spirit. And the
great-hearted Trojans when they beheld the blood of Odysseus, with
clamour through the throng came all together against him. But he gave
ground, and shouted unto his comrades: thrice he shouted then, as loud
as man’s mouth might cry, and thrice did Menelaos dear to Zeus hear his
call, and quickly he spake to Aias that was hard by him: “Aias, of the
seed of Zeus, child of Telamon, lord of the hosts, the shout of
Odysseus of the hardy heart rings round me, like as though the Trojans
were oppressing him alone among them, and had cut him off in the strong
battle. Nay, let us speed into the throng, for better it is to rescue
him. I fear lest he suffer some evil, being alone among the Trojans, so
brave as he is, and lest great sorrow for his loss come upon the
Danaans.”

So spake he, and led the way, and the other followed him, a godlike
man. Then found they Odysseus dear to Zeus, and the Trojans beset him
like tawny jackals from the hills round a wounded horned stag, that a
man hath smitten with an arrow from the bow-string, and the stag hath
fled from him by speed of foot, as long as the blood is warm and his
limbs are strong, but when the swift arrow hath overcome him, then do
the ravening jackals rend him in the hills, in a dark wood, and then
god leadeth a murderous lion thither, and the jackals flee before him,
but he rendeth them, so then, round wise-hearted Odysseus of the crafty
counsels, did the Trojans gather, many and mighty, but that hero
thrusting on with the spear held off the pitiless day. Then Aias drew
near, bearing his shield like a tower, and stood thereby, and the
Trojans fled from him, where each man might. Then warlike Menelaos led
Odysseus out of the press, holding him by the hand, till the squire
drave up the horses.

Then Aias leaped on the Trojans, and slew Doyrklos, bastard son of
Priam, and thereafter wounded he Pandokos, and he wounded Lysandros,
and Pyrasos, and Pylartes. And as when a brimming river cometh down
upon the plain, in winter flood from the hills, swollen by the rain of
Zeus, and many dry oaks and many pines it sucketh in, and much soil it
casteth into the sea, even so renowned Aias charged them, pursuing
through the plain, slaying horses and men. Nor wist Hector thereof at
all, for he was fighting on the left of all the battle, by the banks of
the river Skamandros, whereby chiefly fell the heads of men, and an
unquenchable cry arose, around great Nestor and warlike Idomeneus. And
Hector with them was warring, and terrible things did he, with the
spear and in horsemanship, and he ravaged the battalions of the young
men. Nor would the noble Achaians have yet given ground from the path,
if Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, had not stayed Machaon
shepherd of the host in his valorous deeds, and smitten him on the
right shoulder with a three-barbed arrow. Therefore were the Achaians,
breathing valour, in great fear, lest men should seize Machaon in the
turning of the fight.

Then Idomeneus spake to noble Nestor: “O Nestor, son of Neleus, great
glory of the Achaians, arise, get thee up into thy chariot, and with
thee let Machaon go, and swiftly drive to the ships the whole-hooved
horses. For a leech is worth many other men, to cut out arrows, and
spread soothing medicaments.”

So spake he, nor did knightly Nestor of Gerenia disobey him, but
straightway gat up into his chariot, and with him went Machaon, son of
Asklepios the good leech, and he lashed the horses, and willingly flew
they forward to the hollow ships, where they desired to be.

But Kebriones, the charioteer of Hector, beheld the Trojans driven in
flight, and spake to him, and said: “Hector, here do we contend with
the Danaans, at the limit of the wailful war, but, lo, the other
Trojans are driven in flight confusedly, men and horses. And Aias son
of Telamon is driving them; well I know him, for wide is the shield
round his shoulders. Nay, let us too urge thither the horses and
chariot, there where horsemen and footmen thickest in the forefront of
evil strife are slaying each other, and the cry goes up unquenchable.”

So spake he, and smote the fair-maned horses with the shrill-sounding
whip, and they felt the lash, and fleetly bore the swift chariot among
the Trojans and Achaians, treading on the dead, and the shields, and
with blood was sprinkled all the axle-tree beneath, and the rims round
the car with the drops from the hooves of the horses, and with drops
from the tires about the wheels. And Hector was eager to enter the
press of men, and to leap in and break through, and evil din of battle
he brought among the Danaans, and brief space rested he from smiting
with the spear. Nay, but he ranged among the ranks of other men, with
spear, and sword, and with great stones, but he avoided the battle of
Aias son of Telamon, [for Zeus would have been wroth with him, if he
fought with a better man than himself].

Now father Zeus, throned in the highest, roused dread in Aias, and he
stood in amaze, and cast behind him his sevenfold shield of bull’s
hide, and gazed round in fear upon the throng, like a wild beast,
turning this way and that, and slowly retreating step by step. And as
when hounds and country folk drive a tawny lion from the mid-fold of
the kine, and suffer him not to carry away the fattest of the herd; all
night they watch, and he in great desire for the flesh maketh his
onset, but takes nothing thereby, for thick the darts fly from strong
hands against him, and the burning brands, and these he dreads for all
his fury, and in the dawn he departeth with vexed heart; even so at
that time departed Aias, vexed at heart, from among the Trojans, right
unwillingly, for he feared sore for the ships of the Achaians. And as
when a lazy ass going past a field hath the better of the boys with
him, an ass that hath had many a cudgel broken about his sides, and he
fareth into the deep crop, and wasteth it, while the boys smite him
with cudgels, and feeble is the force of them, but yet with might and
main they drive him forth, when he hath had his fill of fodder, even so
did the high-hearted Trojans and allies, called from many lands, smite
great Aias, son of Telamon, with darts on the centre of his shield, and
ever followed after him. And Aias would now be mindful of his impetuous
valour, and turn again, and hold at bay the battalions of the
horse-taming Trojans, and once more he would turn him again to flee.
Yet he hindered them all from making their way to the fleet ships, and
himself stood and smote between the Trojans and the Achaians, and the
spears from strong hands stuck some of them in his great shield, fain
to win further, and many or ever they reached his white body stood fast
halfway in the earth, right eager to sate themselves with his flesh.

But when Eurypylos, the glorious son of Euaimon, beheld him oppressed
by showers of darts, he went and took his stand by him, and cast with
his shining spear, and smote Apisaon, son of Phausios, shepherd of the
host, in the liver, below the midriff, and straightway loosened his
knees; and Eurypylos sprang on him, and stripped the harness from his
shoulders.

But when godlike Alexandros beheld him stripping the harness from
Apisaon, straightway he drew his bow against Eurypylos, and smote him
with a shaft on the right thigh, and the reed of the shaft brake, and
weighed down the thigh. Then Eurypylos withdrew back into the host of
his comrades, avoiding fate, and with a piercing voice he shouted to
the Danaans: “O friends, leaders and counsellors of the Argives, turn
and stand and ward off the pitiless day from Aias, that is oppressed
with darts, nor methinks will he escape out of the evil din of battle.
Nay, stand ye the rather at bay round great Aias, son of Telamon.”

So spake Eurypylos being wounded, and they stood close together beside
him, sloping the shields on their shoulders, and holding up their
spears, and Aias came to meet them, and turned and stood when he
reached the host of his comrades.

So they fought like unto burning fire.

But the mares of Neleus all sweating bare Nestor out of the battle, and
also carried they Machaon, shepherd of the host. Then the noble
Achilles, swift of foot, beheld and was ware of him, for Achilles was
standing by the stern of his great ship, watching the dire toil, and
the woful rout of battle. And straightway he spake to his own comrade,
Patroklos, calling to him from beside the ship, and he heard, and from
the hut he came, like unto Ares; and this to him was the beginning of
evil. Then the strong son of Menoitios spake first to Achilles: “Why
dost thou call me, Achilles, what need hast thou of me?”

Then swift-footed Achilles answered him and spake: “Noble son of
Menoitios, dear to my heart, now methinks that the Achaians will stand
in prayer about my knees, for need no longer tolerable cometh upon
them. But go now, Patroklos dear to Zeus, and ask Nestor who is this
that he bringeth wounded from the war. Verily from behind he is most
like Machaon, that child of Asklepios, but I beheld not the eyes of the
man, for the horses sped past me, straining forward eagerly.”

So spake he and Patroklos obeyed his dear comrade, and started and ran
past the ships, and the huts of the Achaians.

Now when they came to the hut of the son of Neleus, they lighted down
on the bounteous earth, and the squire, Eurymedon, loosed the horses of
that old man from the car, and they dried the sweat from their
doublets, standing before the breeze, by the shore of the sea, and
thereafter came they to the hut, and sat them down on chairs. And
fair-tressed Hekamede mixed for them a mess, Hekamede that the old man
won from Tenedos, when Achilles sacked it, and she was the daughter of
great-hearted Arsinoos, and her the Achaians chose out for him, because
always in counsel he excelled them all. First she drew before them a
fair table, polished well, with feet of cyanus, and thereon a vessel of
bronze, with onion, for relish to the drink, and pale honey, and the
grain of sacred barley, and beside it a right goodly cup, that the old
man brought from home, embossed with studs of gold, and four handles
there were to it, and round each two golden doves were feeding, and to
the cup were two feet below. Another man could scarce have lifted the
cup from the table, when it was full, but Nestor the Old raised it
easily. In this cup the woman, like unto the goddesses, mixed a mess
for them, with Pramnian wine, and therein grated cheese of goats’ milk,
with a grater of bronze, and scattered white barley thereover, and bade
them drink, whenas she had made ready the mess.

So when the twain had drunk, and driven away parching thirst, they took
their pleasure in discourse, speaking each to the other. Now Patroklos
stood at the doors, a godlike man, and when the old man beheld him, he
arose from his shining chair, and took him by the hand, and led him in,
and bade him be seated. But Patroklos, from over against him, was for
refusing, and spake and said: “No time to sit have I, old man,
fosterling of Zeus, nor wilt thou persuade me. Revered and dreaded is
he that sent me forth to ask thee who this man is that thou bringest
home wounded. Nay, but I know myself, for I see Machaon, shepherd of
the host. And now will I go back again, a messenger, to speak a word to
Achilles. And well dost thou know, old man, fosterling of Zeus, how
terrible a man he is; lightly would he blame even one that is
blameless.”

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him again: “Wherefore is
Achilles thus sorry for the sons of the Achaians, for as many as are
wounded with darts? He knoweth not at all what grief hath arisen in the
camp: for the best men lie in the ships, wounded by shaft or smitten by
spear. Wounded with the shaft is strong Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and
smitten is Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon, [and Eurypylos
hath been shot with an arrow in the thigh], and this other have I but
newly carried out of battle, wounded with an arrow from the bowstring.
But Achilles, for all his valiance, careth not for the Danaans, nor
pities them at all. Doth he wait till the fleet ships hard by the shore
shall burn, maugre the Archives, in the consuming fire, and till we be
slain one upon another? For my strength is no longer what it was before
in my supple limbs. Would that I were in such youth, and my might as
steadfast, as when a strife was set between the Eleians and ourselves,
about a raid on the kine; what time I slew Itymoneus, the brave son of
Hypeirochos, a dweller in Elis, when I was driving the spoil. And in
fighting for his kine was he smitten in the foremost rank by a spear
from my hand, and he fell, and about him were the country folk in great
fear. And a prey exceeding abundant did we drive together out of the
plain, fifty herds of kine, and as many flocks of sheep, and as many
droves of swine, and as many wide flocks of goats, and chestnut horses
a hundred and fifty, all mares, and many with their foals at their
feet. And these by night we drave within Neleian Pylos to the citadel,
and Neleus was glad at heart, for that so much wealth came to me, the
first time I went to war. And the heralds cried aloud, with the coming
of the dawn, that all men should meet that had a debt owing to them in
goodly Elis. And the men that were leaders of the Pylians gathered
together and divided all, for to many did the Epeians owe a debt, for
few we were, and oppressed, that dwelt in Pylos. For the mighty
Herakles had come and oppressed us, in the former years, and all our
best men were slain. For twelve sons were we of noble Neleus, whereof I
alone was left, and all the others perished. And being lifted up with
pride because of these things, the mail-clad Epeians did us despite,
and devised deeds of violence. And out of the spoil that old man, even
Neleus, took him a herd of kine, and a great flock of sheep, choosing
three hundred, and the shepherds with them. For to him was a great debt
owing in goodly Elis: four horses, winners of prizes, with their
chariot had gone to the games, and were to run for a tripod; but these
did Augeias, king of men, hold in bond in that place, but sent away the
driver sorrowing for the horses. By which words and deeds was the old
man angered, so he chose out much booty, uncountable, and the rest he
gave to the people to divide, lest any man should depart deprived by
him of his equal share. So we ordered each thing, and offered victims
to the gods about the city; and on the third day all the Eleians came
together, many men and whole-hooved horses in full array, and with them
the two Moliones in their harness, being still but lads, nor yet well
skilled in impetuous valour. Now there is a certain city, Thryoessa, a
steep burg, far off on Alpheios, the uttermost city of sandy Pylos,
round this they pitched their camp, being eager to raze it utterly. But
when they had passed through all the plain, to us came Athene by night
rushing down from Olympus, with the message that we should arm us. Nor
were the folk unwilling that she gathered in Pylos, but right eager for
war. Now Neleus would not suffer me to arm myself, but hid my horses
away, for he deemed that I knew naught as yet of the deeds of war. Yet
even so did I shine among our horsemen, on foot though I was, for so
Athene led the fight. There is a river Minyeïos, that falleth into the
sea near Arene, where the horsemen of us Pylians waited the fair dawn,
and thither those ranks of footmen flowed onward. Thence in full array,
and harnessed in our gear, we came at midday to the sacred stream of
Alpheios. There to Zeus pre-eminent in might we sacrificed goodly
victims, and a bull to Alpheios, and a bull to Poseidon, but to
bright-eyed Athene a heifer of the herd, and thereafter took we supper
in ranks throughout the camp, and lay down to sleep each man in his
arms, about the streams of the river. Now the great-hearted Epeians
were gathered round the citadel, being eager to sack it utterly. But
ere that might be, there appeared unto them a great deed of war. For
when the bright sun came up above the earth, we joined battle, with
prayer to Zeus, and Athene. But when the strife of the Pylians and
Epeians began, I was the first that slew a man, and got me his
whole-hooved steeds,—the warrior Mulios was he, who had to wife
fair-haired Agamede, the eldest daughter of Augeias, and she knew all
drugs that the wide earth nourisheth. Him as he came on I smote with a
bronze-shod spear, and he fell in the dust and I leaped into the car,
and stood among the foremost fighters. But the great-hearted Epeians
fled this way and that when they saw the man fall, even the leader of
the horsemen, who excelled in battle. But I sprang upon them, like a
black tempest, and fifty chariots I took, and beside each chariot two
men bit the earth with their teeth, subdued beneath my spear. And now
should I have overthrown the twin Moliones, sons of Aktor, if their
sire, the Earthshaker of wide sway, had not saved them out of the
battle, and covered them with a thick mist.* There Zeus gave great
might to the Pylians, for we followed through the wide plain, slaying
the foe and gathering their goodly arms, even till we brought our
horses to Bouprasion, rich in wheat, and the rock Olenian, and where is
the hill called the hill of Alision, whence Athene turned the people
again. There slew I the last man and left him there, but the Achaians
drave back their swift horses from Bouprasion to Pylos, and all gave
praise, among the gods to Zeus, and among men to Nestor. Such was I, if
ever among men I was such an one. But Achilles is for reaping alone the
reward of his valour; surely methinks that he will repent, and lament
sore when the host perisheth. O friend, surely Menoitios thus gave thee
command, on that day when he sent thee out of Phthia to Agamemnon. And
we twain were within the house, I and goodly Odysseus, and in the halls
heard we all things even as he commanded thee. For we had come to the
fair-set halls of Peleus, gathering the host throughout Achaia of the
fair dames. There then we found the hero Menoitios within, and thee,
and with thee Achilles. And Peleus the Old, the lord of horses, was
burning the fat thighs of kine to Zeus, whose joy is in the thunder, in
the precinct of his court, and held in his hand a chalice of gold,
pouring forth the bright wine upon the burning offerings. And ye were
busy about the flesh of the ox, and then stood we in the doorway, and
Achilles leaped up in amazement, and took us by the hand, and led us
in, and bade us be seated, and set before us well the entertainment of
strangers, all that is their due. But when we had taken delight in
eating and drinking, I began the discourse, and bade you follow with
us, and ye were right eager, and those twain laid on you many commands.
Peleus the Old bade his son Achilles be ever the boldest in fight, and
pre-eminent over others, but to thee did Menoitios thus give command,
the son of Aktor: ‘My child, of lineage is Achilles higher than thou,
and thou art elder, but in might he is better far. But do thou speak to
him well a word of wisdom, and put it to him gently, and show him what
things he should do, and he will obey thee to his profit.’ So did the
old man give thee command, but thou art forgetful. Nay, but even now
speak thou thus and thus to wise-hearted Achilles, if perchance he will
obey thee. Who knows but that, God helping, thou mightst stir his
spirit with thy persuading? and good is the persuasion of a friend. But
if in his heart he be shunning some oracle of God, and his lady mother
hath told him somewhat from Zeus, natheless let him send forth thee,
and let the rest of the host of the Myrmidons follow with thee, if
perchance any light shall arise from thee to the Danaans; and let him
give thee his fair harness, to bear into the war, if perchance the
Trojans may take thee for him, and withhold them from the strife, and
the warlike sons of the Achaians might take breath, being wearied; for
brief is the breathing time in battle. And lightly might ye, being
unwearied, drive men wearied in the war unto the city, away from the
ships and the huts.”

* Aktor was the putative, Poseidon the real father of the Moliones.


So spake he, and roused his heart within his breast, and he started and
ran by the ships to Achilles of the seed of Aiakos. But when Patroklos
came in his running to the ships of godlike Odysseus, where was their
assembly and place of law, and whereby also were their altars of the
gods established, there did Eurypylos meet him, Euaimon’s son, of the
seed of Zeus, wounded in the thigh with an arrow, and limping out of
the battle. And sweat ran down streaming from his head and shoulders,
and from his cruel wound the black blood was welling, but his mind was
unshaken. And the strong son of Menoitios had pity on him when he
beheld him, and lamenting he spake winged words: “Ah, wretched men, ye
leaders and counsellors of the Danaans. How are ye now doomed, far from
your friends and your own country, to feed full with your white fat the
swift hounds in Troia! But come, tell me this, Eurypylos, hero and
fosterling of Zeus, will the Achaians yet in any wise restrain mighty
Hector, or will they perish even now, subdued beneath his spear?”

And to him again did the wounded Eurypylos make answer: “No more,
Patroklos of the seed of Zeus, will there be any defence of the
Achaians, but they will fall among the black ships. For verily all of
them, that afore were bravest, are lying in the ships wounded and
smitten by the hands of the Trojans, whose strength is waxing always.
But me do thou succour, and lead me to the black ship, and cut the
arrow out of my thigh, and wash away the black blood from it with warm
water, and smear soft healing drugs thereover, these good herbs whereof
they say that thou hast learned from Achilles, whom Cheiron taught, the
most righteous of the Centaurs. For of the leeches, Podaleirios and
Machaon, one methinks, is wounded in the huts, and himself hath need of
a good leech, and the other on the plain abideth the keen battle of the
Trojans.”

Then the strong son of Menoitios answered him again: “How should these
things be? what shall we do, hero Eurypylos? I am on my way to carry a
saying to wise-hearted Achilles, even the command of Nestor of Gerenia,
warden of the Achaians; nay, but not even so will I be heedless of thee
that art wounded.”

So spake he, and clasped the shepherd of the host below the breast, and
led him to the hut; and the squire when he beheld them cast on the
ground the skins of oxen. There he stretched him at length, and cut
with a knife the sharp arrow from his thigh, and washed from it the
black blood with warm water. And thereon he cast a bitter root rubbing
it between his hands, a root that took pain away, and ended all his
anguish, and the wound began to dry, and the blood ceased.




BOOK XII.


How the Trojans and allies broke within the wall of the Achaians.


So in the huts the strong son of Menoitios was tending the wounded
Eurypylos, but still they fought confusedly, the Argives and Trojans.
Nor were the fosse of the Danaans and their wide wall above, long to
protect them, the wall they had builded for defence of the ships, and
the fosse they had drawn round about; for neither had they given goodly
hecatombs to the gods, that it might guard with its bounds their swift
ships, and rich spoil. Nay, maugre the deathless gods was it builded,
wherefore it abode steadfast for no long time. While Hector yet lived,
and yet Achilles kept his wrath, and unsacked was the city of Priam the
king, so long the great wall of the Achaians likewise abode steadfast.
But when all the bravest of the Trojans died, and many of the
Argives,—some were taken, and some were left,—and the city of Priam was
sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back in their ships
to their own dear country, then verily did Poseidon and Apollo take
counsel to wash away the wall, bringing in the might of the rivers, of
all that flow from the hills of Ida to the sea. Rhesos there was, and
Heptaporos, and Karesos, and Rhodios, Grenikos, and Aisepos, and goodly
Skamandros, and Simoeis, whereby many shields and helms fell in the
dust, and the generation of men half divine; the mouths of all these
waters did Phoebus Apollo turn together, and for nine days he drave
their stream against the wall; and still Zeus rained unceasingly, that
the quicker he might mingle the wall with the salt sea. And the Shaker
of the earth, with his trident in his hands, was himself the leader,
and sent forth into the waves all the foundations of beams and stones
that the Achaians had laid with toil, and made all smooth by the strong
current of the Hellespont, and covered again the great beach with sand,
when he had swept away the wall, and turned the rivers back to flow in
their channel, where of old they poured down their fair flow of water.

So were Poseidon and Apollo to do in the aftertime; but then war and
the din of war sounded about the well-builded wall, and the beams of
the towers rang beneath the strokes; while the Argives, subdued by the
scourge of Zeus, were penned and driven in by the hollow ships, in
dread of Hector, the mighty maker of flight, but he, as aforetime,
fought like a whirlwind. And as when, among hounds and hunting men, a
boar or lion wheeleth him about, raging in his strength, and these
array themselves in fashion like a tower, and stand up against him,
casting many javelins from their hands; but never is his stout heart
confused nor afraid, and his courage is his bane, and often he wheeleth
him about, and maketh trial of the ranks of men, and wheresoever he
maketh onset there the ranks of men give way, even so Hector went and
besought his comrades through the press, and spurred them on to cross
the dyke. But his swift-footed horses dared not, but loud they neighed,
standing by the sheer edge, for the wide fosse affrighted them, neither
easy to leap from hard by, nor to cross, for overhanging banks stood
round about it all on either hand, and above it was furnished with
sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaians had planted there, thick set
and great, a bulwark against hostile men. Thereby not lightly might a
horse enter, drawing a well-wheeled chariot; but the footmen were
eager, if they might accomplish it. Then Polydamas drew near valiant
Hector, and spake to him: “Hector and ye other leaders of the Trojans
and allies, foolishly do we drive our fleet horses through the dyke;
nay right hard it is to cross, for sharp stakes stand in it, and over
against them the wall of the Achaians. Thereby none may go down and
fight in chariots, for strait is the place wherein, methinks, we might
come by a mischief. For if Zeus that thunders on high is utterly to
destroy them in his evil will, and is minded to help the Trojans,
verily then I too would desire that even instantly this might be, that
the Achaians should perish here nameless far from Argos: but and if
they turn again, and we flee back from among the ships, and rush into
the delved ditch, then methinks that not even one from among us to bear
the tidings will win back to the city before the force of the Achaians
when they rally. But come as I declare, let us all obey. Let our
squires hold the horses by the dyke, while we being harnessed in our
gear as foot soldiers follow all together with Hector, and the Achaians
will not withstand us, if indeed the bands of death be made fast upon
them.”

So spake Polydamas, and his wise word pleased Hector well, and
straightway in his harness he leaped from his chariot to the ground.
Nor were the other Trojans gathered upon the chariots, but they all
leaped forth, when they beheld goodly Hector. There each gave it into
the charge of his own charioteer, to keep the horses orderly there by
the fosse. And they divided, and arrayed themselves, and ordered in
five companies they followed with the leaders.

Now they that went with Hector and noble Polydamas, these were most,
and bravest, and most were eager to break the wall, and fight by the
hollow ships; and with them followed Kebriones for the third, for
Hector had left another man with his chariot, a weaker warrior than
Kebriones. The second company Paris led, and Alkathoos, and Agenor: and
the third company Helenos led, and godlike Deiphobos,—two sons of
Priam,—the third was the warrior Asios, Asios Hyrtakos’ son, whom his
tall sorrel steeds brought out of Arisbe, from the river Selleëis. And
of the fourth company was the brave son of Anchises leader, even
Aineias; and with him were two sons of Antenor, Archelochos and Akamas,
both well skilled in all warfare.

And Sarpedon led the glorious allies, and to be with him he chose
Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios, for they seemed to him to be
manifestly the bravest of all after himself but he was excellent, yea,
above all the host. And these when they had arrayed one another with
well-fashioned shields of bulls’ hide, went straight and eager against
the Danaans, nor deemed that they could longer resist them, but that
themselves should fall on the black ships.

Then the rest of the Trojans and the far-famed allies obeyed the
counsel of blameless Polydamas, but Asios, son of Hyrtakos, leader of
men, willed not to leave his horses there, and his squire the
charioteer, but with them he drew near the swift ships, fond man! for
never was he, avoiding evil Fates, to return, rejoicing in his horses
and chariot, back from the ships to windy Ilios. Nay, ere that the Fate
of ill name overshadowed him, by the spear of Idomeneus, the haughty
son of Deukalion. For Asios went against the left flank of the ships,
whereby the Achaians returned out of the plain with chariots and
horses: there he drave through his horses and his car, nor found he the
doors shut on the gates, and the long bar, but men were holding them
open if perchance they might save any of their comrades fleeing out of
the battle towards the ships. Straight thereby held he his horses with
unswerving aim, and his men followed him, crying shrilly, for they
deemed that the Achaians could no longer hold them off, but that
themselves would fall on the black ships: fools, for in the gates they
found two men of the bravest, the high-hearted sons of the warrior
Lapithae, one the son of Peirithoos, strong Polypoites, and one
Leonteus, peer of Ares the bane of men. These twain stood in front of
the lofty gates, like high-crested oak trees in the hills, that for
ever abide the wind and rain, firm fixed with roots great and long;
even so these twain, trusting to the mightiness of their hands, abode
the coming of great Asios, and fled not. But straight came the Trojans
against the well-builded wall, holding their shields of dry bulls’ hide
on high, with mighty clamour, round the prince Asios, and Iamenos, and
Orestes, and Adamas, son of Asios, and Thoon, and Oinomaos. But the
other twain for a while, being within the wall, urged the well-greaved
Achaians to fight for the ships; but when they saw the Trojans
assailing the wall, while the Danaans cried and turned in flight, then
forth rushed the twain, and fought in front of the gates like wild
boars that in the mountains abide the assailing crew of men and dogs,
and charging on either flank they crush the wood around them, cutting
it at the root, and the clatter of their tusks waxes loud, till one
smite them and take their life away: so clattered the bright bronze on
the breasts of the twain, as they were smitten in close fight, for
right hardily they fought, trusting to the host above them, and to
their own strength.

For the men above were casting with stones from the well-builded towers
in defence of themselves and of the huts, and of the swift-faring
ships. And like snowflakes the stones fell earthward, flakes that a
tempestuous wind, as it driveth the dark clouds, rains thickly down on
the bounteous earth: so thick fell the missiles from the hands of
Achaians and Trojans alike, and their helms rang harsh and their bossy
shields, being smitten with mighty stones. Verily then Asios, son of
Hyrtakos, groaned and smote both his thighs, and indignantly he spake:
“Father Zeus, verily thou too dost greatly love a lie, for I deemed not
that the Achaian heroes could withstand our might and our hands
invincible. But they like wasps of nimble body, or bees that have made
their dwellings in a rugged path, and leave not their hollow hold, but
abide and keep the hunters at bay for the sake of their little ones,
even so these men have no will to give ground from the gates, though
they are but two, ere they slay or be slain.”

So spake he, nor with his speech did he persuade the mind of Zeus, for
his will was to give renown to Hector.

[But the others were fighting about the other gates, and hard it were
for me like a god to tell all these things, for everywhere around the
wall of stone rose the fire divine; the Argives, for all their sorrow,
defending the ships of necessity; and all the gods were grieved at
heart, as many as were defenders of the Danaans in battle. And together
the Lapithae waged war and strife.]

There the son of Peirithoos, mighty Polypoites, smote Damasos with the
spear, through the helmet with cheekpieces of bronze; nor did the
bronze helm stay the spear, but the point of bronze brake clean through
the bone, and all the brain within was scattered, and the spear
overcame him in his eagerness. Thereafter he slew Pylon and Ormenos.
And Leonteus of the stock of Ares smote Hippomachos, son of Antimachos,
with the spear, striking him on the girdle. Then again he drew his
sharp sword from the sheath, and smote Antiphates first in close fight,
rushing on him through the throng, that he fell on his back on the
ground; and thereafter he brought down Menon, and Iamenos, and Orestes
one after the other, to the bounteous earth.

While they were stripping from these the shining arms, the young men
who followed with Polydamas and Hector, they that were most in number
and bravest, and most were eager to break the wall and set the ships on
fire, these still stood doubtful by the fosse, for as they were eager
to pass over a bird had appeared to them, an eagle of lofty flight,
skirting the host on the left hand. In its talons it bore a blood-red
monstrous snake, alive, and struggling still; yea, not yet had it
forgotten the joy of battle, but writhed backward and smote the bird
that held it on the breast, beside the neck, and the bird cast it from
him down to the earth, in sore pain, and dropped it in the midst of the
throng; then with a cry sped away down the gusts of the wind. And the
Trojans shuddered when they saw the gleaming snake lying in the midst
of them; an omen of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then verily Polydamas stood by brave Hector, and spake: “Hector, ever
dost thou rebuke me in the assemblies, though I counsel wisely; since
it by no means beseemeth one of the people to speak contrary to thee,
in council or in war, but always to increase thy power; but now again
will I say all that seemeth to me to be best. Let us not advance and
fight with the Danaans for the ships. For even thus, methinks, the end
will be, if indeed this bird hath come for the Trojans when they were
eager to cross the dyke, this eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host
on the left hand, bearing in his talons a blood-red monstrous snake,
yet living; then straightway left he hold of him, before he reached his
own nest, nor brought him home in the end to give to his nestlings.
Even so shall we, though we burst with mighty force the gates and wall
of the Achaians, and the Achaians give ground, even so we shall return
in disarray from the ships by the way we came; for many of the Trojans
shall we leave behind, whom the Achaians will slay with the sword, in
defence of the ships. Even so would a soothsayer interpret that in his
heart had clear knowledge of omens, and whom the people obeyed.”

Then Hector of the glancing helm lowered on him and said: “Polydamas,
that thou speakest is no longer pleasing to me; yea, thou knowest how
to conceive another counsel better than this. But if thou verily
speakest thus in earnest, then the gods themselves have utterly
destroyed thy wits; thou that bidst us forget the counsels of
loud-thundering Zeus, that himself promised me, and confirmed with a
nod of his head! But thou bidst us be obedient to birds long of wing,
whereto I give no heed, nor take any care thereof, whether they fare to
the right, to the dawn and to the sun, or to the left, to mist and
darkness. Nay, for us, let us trust to the counsel of mighty Zeus, who
is king over all mortals and immortals. One omen is best, to fight for
our own country. And wherefore dost thou fear war and battle? For if
all the rest of us be slain by the ships of the Argives, yet needst
thou not fear to perish, for thy heart is not warlike, nor enduring in
battle. But if thou dost hold aloof from the fight, or winnest any
other with thy words to turn him from war, straightway by my spear
shalt thou be smitten, and lose thy life.”

So spake he, and led on, and they followed with a wondrous din; and
Zeus that joyeth in the thunder roused from the hills of Ida a blast of
wind, which bare the dust straight against the ships; and he made weak
the heart of the Achaians, but gave renown to the Trojans and to
Hector. Trusting then in his omens, and their might, they strove to
break the great wall of the Achaians. They dragged down the
machicolations of the towers, and overthrew the battlements, and heaved
up the projecting buttresses, that the Achaians set first in the earth,
to be the props of the towers. These they overthrew, and hoped to break
the wall of the Achaians. Nor even now did the Danaans give ground from
the path, but closed up the battlements with shields of bulls’ hides,
and cast from them at the foemen as they went below the walls.

Now the two Aiantes went everywhere on the towers, ever urging, and
arousing the courage of the Achaians. One they would accost with
honeyed words, another with hard words they would rebuke, whomsoever
they saw utterly giving ground from the fight: “O friends, whosoever is
eminent, or whosoever is of middle station among the Argives, ay, or
lower yet, for in no wise are all men equal in war, now is there work
for all, and this yourselves well know. Let none turn back to the
ships, for that he hath heard one threatening aloud; nay, get ye
forward, and cheer another on, if perchance Olympian Zeus, the lord of
lightning, will grant us to drive back the assault, and push the foe to
the city.”

So these twain shouted in the front, and aroused the battle of the
Achaians. But as flakes of snow fall thick on a winter day, when Zeus
the Counsellor hath begun to snow, showing forth these arrows of his to
men, and he hath lulled the winds, and he snoweth continually, till he
hath covered the crests of the high hills, and the uttermost headlands,
and the grassy plains, and rich tillage of men; and the snow is
scattered over the havens and shores of the grey sea, and only the wave
as it rolleth in keeps off the snow, but all other things are swathed
over, when the shower of Zeus cometh heavily, so from both sides their
stones flew thick, some towards the Trojans, and some from the Trojans
against the Achaians, while both sides were smitten, and over all the
wall the din arose.

Yet never would the Trojans, then, and renowned Hector have broken the
gates of the wall, and the long bar, if Zeus the Counsellor had not
roused his son Sarpedon against the Argives, like a lion against the
kine of crooked horn. Straightway he held forth his fair round shield,
of hammered bronze, that the bronze-smith had hammered out, and within
had stitched many bulls’ hides with rivets of gold, all round the
circle, this held he forth, and shook two spears; and sped on his way,
like a mountain-nurtured lion, that long lacketh meat, and his brave
spirit urgeth him to make assail on the sheep, and come even against a
well-builded homestead. Nay, even if he find herdsmen thereby, guarding
the sheep with hounds and spears, yet hath he no mind to be driven
without an effort from the steading, but he either leapeth on a sheep,
and seizeth it, or himself is smitten in the foremost place with a dart
from a strong hand. So did his heart then urge on the godlike Sarpedon
to rush against the wall, and break through the battlements. And
instantly he spake to Glaukos, son of Hippolochos: “Glaukos, wherefore
have we twain the chiefest honour,—seats of honour, and messes, and
full cups in Lykia, and all men look on us as gods? And wherefore hold
we a great demesne by the banks of Xanthos, a fair demesne of
orchard-land, and wheat-bearing tilth? Therefore now it behoveth us to
take our stand in the first rank of the Lykians, and encounter fiery
battle, that certain of the well-corsleted Lykians may say, ‘Verily our
kings that rule Lykia be no inglorious men, they that eat fat sheep,
and drink the choice wine honey-sweet: nay, but they are also of
excellent might, for they war in the foremost ranks of the Lykians.’
Ah, friend, if once escaped from this battle we were for ever to be
ageless and immortal, neither would I fight myself in the foremost
ranks, nor would I send thee into the war that giveth men renown, but
now—for assuredly ten thousand fates of death do every way beset us,
and these no mortal may escape nor avoid—now let us go forward, whether
we shall give glory to other men, or others to us.”

So spake he, and Glaukos turned not apart, nor disobeyed him, and they
twain went straight forward, leading the great host of the Lykians.

Then Menestheus son of Peteos shuddered when he beheld them, for
against his tower they went, bringing with them ruin; and he looked
along the tower of the Achaians if perchance he might see any of the
leaders, that would ward off destruction from his comrades, and he
beheld the two Aiantes, insatiate of war, standing there, and Teukros
hard by, newly come from his hut; but he could not cry to be heard of
them, so great was the din, and the noise went up unto heaven of
smitten shields and helms with horse-hair crests, and of the gates, for
they had all been shut, and the Trojans stood beside them, and strove
by force to break them, and enter in. Swiftly then to Aias he sent the
herald Thoötes: “Go, noble Thoötes, and run, and call Aias: or rather
the twain, for that will be far the best of all, since quickly here
will there be wrought utter ruin. For hereby press the leaders of the
Lykians, who of old are fierce in strong battle. But if beside them too
war and toil arise, yet at least let the strong Telamonian Aias come
alone, and let Teukros the skilled bowman follow with him.”

So spake he, and the herald listened and disobeyed him not, but started
and ran by the wall of the mail-clad Achaians, and came, and stood by
the Aiantes, and straightway spake: “Ye twain Aiantes, leaders of the
mail-clad Achaians, the dear son of Peteos, fosterling of Zeus, biddeth
you go thither, that, if it be but for a little while, ye may take your
part in battle: both of you he more desireth, for that will be far the
best of all, since quickly there will there be wrought utter ruin. For
thereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of old are fierce in
strong battle. But if beside you too war and toil arise, yet at least
let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone, and let Teukros the skilled
bowman follow with him.”

So spake he, nor did the strong Telamonian Aias disobey, but instantly
spake winged words to the son of Oileus: “Aias, do ye twain stand here,
thyself and strong Lykomedes, and urge the Danaans to war with all
their might; but I go thither, to take my part in battle, and quickly
will I come again, when I have well aided them.”

So spake Telamonian Aias and departed, and Teukros went with him, his
brother by the same father, and with them Pandion bare the bended bow
of Teukros.

Now when they came to the tower of great-hearted Menestheus, passing
within the wall,—and to men sore pressed they came,—the foe were
climbing upon the battlements, like a dark whirlwind, even the strong
leaders and counsellors of the Lykians; and they hurled together into
the war and the battle-cry arose. Now first did Aias Telamon’s son slay
a man, Epikles great of heart, the comrade of Sarpedon. With a jagged
stone he smote him, a great stone that lay uppermost within the wall,
by the battlements. Not lightly could a man hold it in both hands,
however strong in his youth, of such mortals as now are, but Aias
lifted it, and cast it from above, and shattered the helm of fourfold
crest, and broke the bones of the head, and he fell like a diver from
the lofty tower, and his life left his bones. And Teukros smote
Glaukos, the strong son of Hippolochos, as he came on, with an arrow
from the lofty wall; even where he saw his shoulder bare he smote him,
and made him cease from delight in battle. Back from the wall he leapt
secretly, lest any of the Achaians should see him smitten, and speak
boastfully. But sorrow came on Sarpedon when Glaukos departed, so soon
as he was aware thereof, but he forgot not the joy of battle. He aimed
at Alkmaon, son of Thestor, with the spear, and smote him, and drew out
the spear. And Alkmaon following the spear fell prone, and his
bronze-dight arms rang round him. Then Sarpedon seized with strong
hands the battlement, and dragged, and it all gave way together, while
above the wall was stripped bare, and made a path for many.

Then Aias and Teukros did encounter him: Teukros smote him with an
arrow, on the bright baldric of his covering shield, about the breast,
but Zeus warded off the Fates from his son, that he should not be
overcome beside the ships’ sterns. Then Aias leaped on and smote his
shield, nor did the spear pass clean through, yet shook he Sarpedon in
his eagerness. He gave ground a little way from the battlement, yet
retreated not wholly, since his heart hoped to win renown. Then he
turned and cried to the godlike Lykians: “O Lykians, wherefore thus are
ye slack in impetuous valour. Hard it is for me, stalwart as I am,
alone to break through, and make a path to the ships, nay, follow hard
after me, for the more men, the better work.”

So spake he, and they, dreading the rebuke of their king, pressed on
the harder around the counsellor and king. And the Argives on the other
side made strong their battalions within the wall, and mighty toil
began for them. For neither could the strong Lykians burst through the
wall of the Danaans, and make a way to the ships, nor could the warlike
Danaans drive back the Lykians from the wall, when once they had drawn
near thereto. But as two men contend about the marches of their land,
with measuring rods in their hands, in a common field, when in narrow
space they strive for equal shares, even so the battlements divided
them, and over those they smote the round shields of ox hide about the
breasts of either side, and the fluttering bucklers. And many were
wounded in the flesh with the ruthless bronze, whensoever the back of
any of the warriors was laid bare as he turned, ay, and many clean
through the very shield. Yea, everywhere the towers and battlements
swam with the blood of men shed on either side, by Trojans and
Achaians. But even so they could not put the Argives to rout, but they
held their ground, as an honest woman that laboureth with her hands
holds the balance, and raises the weight and the wool together,
balancing them, that she may win scant wages for her children; so
evenly was strained their war and battle, till the moment when Zeus
gave the greater renown to Hector, son of Priam, who was the first to
leap within the wall of the Achaians. In a piercing voice he cried
aloud to the Trojans: “Rise, ye horse-taming Trojans, break the wall of
the Argives, and cast among the ships fierce blazing fire.”

So spake he, spurring them on, and they all heard him with their ears,
and in one mass rushed straight against the wall, and with sharp spears
in their hands climbed upon the machicolations of the towers. And
Hector seized and carried a stone that lay in front of the gates, thick
in the hinder part, but sharp at point: a stone that not the two best
men of the people, such as mortals now are, could lightly lift from the
ground on to a wain, but easily he wielded it alone, for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos made it light for him. And as when a
shepherd lightly beareth the fleece of a ram, taking it in one hand,
and little doth it burden him, so Hector lifted the stone, and bare it
straight against the doors that closely guarded the stubborn-set
portals, double gates and tall, and two cross bars held them within,
and one bolt fastened them. And he came, and stood hard by, and firmly
planted himself, and smote them in the midst, setting his legs well
apart, that his cast might lack no strength. And he brake both the
hinges, and the stone fell within by reason of its weight, and the
gates rang loud around, and the bars held not, and the doors burst this
way and that beneath the rush of the stone. Then glorious Hector leaped
in, with face like the sudden night, shining in wondrous mail that was
clad about his body, and with two spears in his hands. No man that met
him could have held him back when once he leaped within the gates: none
but the gods, and his eyes shone with fire. Turning towards the throng
he cried to the Trojans to overleap the wall, and they obeyed his
summons, and speedily some overleaped the wall, and some poured into
the fair-wrought gateways, and the Danaans fled in fear among the
hollow ships, and a ceaseless clamour arose.




BOOK XIII.


Poseidon stirreth up the Achaians to defend the ships. The valour of
Idomeneus.


Now Zeus, after that he had brought the Trojans and Hector to the
ships, left them to their toil and endless labour there, but otherwhere
again he turned his shining eyes, and looked upon the land of the
Thracian horsebreeders, and the Mysians, fierce fighters hand to hand,
and the proud Hippemolgoi that drink mare’s milk, and the Abioi, the
most righteous of men. To Troy no more at all he turned his shining
eyes, for he deemed in his heart that not one of the Immortals would
draw near, to help either Trojans or Danaans.

But the mighty Earthshaker held no blind watch, who sat and marvelled
on the war and strife, high on the topmost crest of wooded Samothrace,
for thence all Ida was plain to see; and plain to see were the city of
Priam, and the ships of the Achaians. Thither did he go from the sea
and sate him down, and he had pity on the Achaians, that they were
subdued to the Trojans, and strong was his anger against Zeus.

Then forthwith he went down from the rugged hill, faring with swift
steps, and the high hills trembled, and the woodland, beneath the
immortal footsteps of Poseidon as he moved. Three strides he made, and
with the fourth he reached his goal, even Aigae, and there was his
famous palace in the deeps of the mere, his glistering golden mansions
builded, imperishable for ever. Thither went he, and let harness to the
car his bronze-hooved horses, swift of flight, clothed with their
golden manes. He girt his own golden array about his body, and seized
the well-wrought lash of gold, and mounted his chariot, and forth he
drove across the waves. And the sea beasts frolicked beneath him, on
all sides out of the deeps, for well they knew their lord, and with
gladness the sea stood asunder, and swiftly they sped, and the axle of
bronze was not wetted beneath, and the bounding steeds bare him on to
the ships of the Achaians.

Now there is a spacious cave in the depths of the deep mere, between
Tenedos and rugged Imbros; there did Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth,
stay his horses, and loosed them out of the chariot, and cast before
them ambrosial food to graze withal, and golden tethers he bound about
their hooves, tethers neither to be broken nor loosed, that there the
horses might continually await their lord’s return. And he went to the
host of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans like flame or storm-wind were following in close array,
with fierce intent, after Hector, son of Priam. With shouts and cries
they came, and thought to take the ships of the Achaians, and to slay
thereby all the bravest of the host. But Poseidon, that girdleth the
world, the Shaker of the earth, was urging on the Argives, and forth he
came from the deep salt sea, in form and untiring voice like unto
Kalchas. First he spake to the two Aiantes, that themselves were eager
for battle: “Ye Aiantes twain, ye shall save the people of the
Achaians, if ye are mindful of your might, and reckless of chill fear.
For verily I do not otherwhere dread the invincible hands of the
Trojans, that have climbed the great wall in their multitude, nay, the
well-greaved Achaians will hold them all at bay; but hereby verily do I
greatly dread lest some evil befall us, even here where that furious
one is leading like a flame of fire, Hector, who boasts him to be son
of mighty Zeus. Nay, but here may some god put it into the hearts of
you twain, to stand sturdily yourselves, and urge others to do the
like; thereby might ye drive him from the fleet-faring ships, despite
his eagerness, yea, even if the Olympian himself is rousing him to
war.”

Therewith the Shaker of the world, the girdler of the earth, struck the
twain with his staff, and filled them with strong courage, and their
limbs he made light, and their feet, and their hands withal. Then, even
as a swift-winged hawk speeds forth to fly, poised high above a tall
sheer rock, and swoops to chase some other bird across the plain, even
so Poseidon sped from them, the Shaker of the world. And of the twain
Oileus’ son, the swift-footed Aias, was the first to know the god, and
instantly he spake to Aias, son of Telamon: “Aias, since it is one of
the gods who hold Olympus, that in the semblance of a seer commands us
now to fight beside the ships—not Kalchas is he, the prophet and
soothsayer, for easily I knew the tokens of his feet and knees as he
turned away, and the gods are easy to discern—lo, then mine own heart
within my breast is more eagerly set on war and battle, and my feet
beneath and my hands above are lusting for the fight.”

Then Aias, son of Telamon, answered him saying: “Even so, too, my hands
invincible now rage about the spear-shaft, and wrath has risen within
me, and both my feet are swift beneath me; yea, I am keen to meet, even
in single fight, the ceaseless rage of Hector son of Priam.”

So they spake to each other, rejoicing in the delight of battle, which
the god put in their heart. Then the girdler of the earth stirred up
the Achaians that were in the rear and were renewing their strength
beside the swift ships. Their limbs were loosened by their grievous
toil, yea, and their souls filled with sorrow at the sight of the
Trojans, that had climbed over the great wall in their multitude. And
they looked on them, and shed tears beneath their brows, thinking that
never would they escape destruction. But the Shaker of the earth right
easily came among them, and urged on the strong battalions of warriors.
Teukros first he came and summoned, and Leïtos, and the hero Peneleos,
and Thoas, and Deïpyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos, lords of the
war-cry, all these he spurred on with winged words: “Shame on you,
Argives, shame, ye striplings, in your battle had I trusted for the
salvation of our ships. But if you are to withdraw from grievous war,
now indeed the day doth shine that shall see us conquered by the
Trojans. Out on it, for verily a great marvel is this that mine eyes
behold, a terrible thing that methought should never come to pass, the
Trojans advancing against our ships! Of yore they were like fleeting
hinds, that in the wild wood are the prey of jackals, and pards, and
wolves, and wander helpless, strengthless, empty of the joy of battle.
Even so the Trojans of old cared never to wait and face the wrath and
the hands of the Achaians, not for a moment. But now they are fighting
far from the town, by the hollow ships, all through the baseness of our
leader and the remissness of the people, who, being at strife with the
chief, have no heart to defend the swift-faring ships, nay, thereby
they are slain. But if indeed and in truth the hero Agamemnon, the
wide-ruling son of Atreus, is the very cause of all, for that he did
dishonour the swift-footed son of Peleus, not even so may we refrain in
any wise from war. Nay, let us right our fault with speed, for easily
righted are the hearts of the brave. No longer do ye well to refrain
from impetuous might, all ye that are the best men of the host. I
myself would not quarrel with one that, being a weakling, abstained
from war, but with you I am heartily wroth. Ah, friends, soon shall ye
make the mischief more through this remissness,—but let each man
conceive shame in his heart, and indignation, for verily great is the
strife that hath arisen. Lo, the mighty Hector of the loud war-cry is
fighting at the ships, and the gates and the long bar he hath burst in
sunder.”

On this wise did the Earth-enfolder call to and spur on the Achaians.
And straightway they made a stand around the two Aiantes, strong bands
that Ares himself could not enter and make light of, nor Athene that
marshals the host. Yea, they were the chosen best that abode the
Trojans and goodly Hector, and spear on spear made close-set fence, and
shield on serried shield, buckler pressed on buckler, and helm on helm,
and man on man. The horse-hair crests on the bright helmet-ridges
touched each other as they nodded, so close they stood each by other,
and spears brandished in bold hands were interlaced; and their hearts
were steadfast and lusted for battle.

Then the Trojans drave forward in close array, and Hector led them,
pressing straight onwards, like a rolling rock from a cliff, that the
winter-swollen water thrusteth from the crest of a hill, having broken
the foundations of the stubborn rock with its wondrous flood; leaping
aloft it flies, and the wood echoes under it, and unstayed it runs its
course, till it reaches the level plain, and then it rolls no more for
all its eagerness,—even so Hector for a while threatened lightly to win
to the sea through the huts and the ships of the Achaians, slaying as
he came, but when he encountered the serried battalions, he was stayed
when he drew near against them. But they of the other part, the sons of
the Achaians, thrust with their swords and double-pointed spears, and
drave him forth from them, that he gave ground and reeled backward.
Then he cried with a piercing voice, calling on the Trojans: “Trojans,
and Lykians, and close-fighting Dardanians, hold your ground, for the
Achaians will not long ward me off, nay, though they have arrayed
themselves in fashion like a tower. Rather, methinks, they will flee
back before the spear, if verily the chief of gods has set me on, the
loud-thundering lord of Hera.”

Therewith he spurred on the heart and spirit of each man; and
Deïphobos, the son of Priam, strode among them with high thoughts, and
held in front of him the circle of his shield, and lightly he stepped
with his feet, advancing beneath the cover of his shield. Then Meriones
aimed at him with a shining spear, and struck, and missed not, but
smote the circle of the bulls’-hide shield, yet no whit did he pierce
it; nay, well ere that might be, the long spear-shaft snapped in the
socket. Now Deiphobos was holding off from him the bulls’-hide shield,
and his heart feared the lance of wise Meriones, but that hero shrunk
back among the throng of his comrades, greatly in wrath both for the
loss of victory, and of his spear, that he had shivered. So he set
forth to go to the huts and the ships of the Achaians, to bring a long
spear, that he had left in his hut.

Meanwhile the others were fighting on, and there arose an
inextinguishable cry. First Teukros, son of Telamon, slew a man, the
spearman Imbrios, the son of Mentor rich in horses. In Pedaion he
dwelt, before the coming of the sons of the Achaians, and he had for
wife a daughter of Priam, born out of wedlock, Medesikaste; but when
the curved ships of the Danaans came, he returned again to Ilios, and
was pre-eminent among the Trojans, and dwelt with Priam, who honoured
him like his own children. Him the son of Telemon pierced below the ear
with his long lance, and plucked back the spear. Then he fell like an
ash that on the crest of a far-seen hill is smitten with the axe of
bronze, and brings its delicate foliage to the ground; even so he fell,
and round him rang his armour bedight with bronze. Then Teukros rushed
forth, most eager to strip his armour, and Hector cast at him as he
came with his shining spear. But Teukros, steadily regarding him,
avoided by a little the spear of bronze; so Hector struck Amphimachos,
son of Kteatos, son of Aktor, in the breast with the spear, as he was
returning to the battle. With a crash he fell, and his armour rang upon
him.

Then Hector sped forth to tear from the head of great-hearted
Amphimachos the helmet closely fitted to his temples, but Aias aimed at
Hector as he came, with a shining spear, yet in no wise touched his
body, for he was all clad in dread armour of bronze; but he smote the
boss of his shield, and drave him back by main force, and he gave place
from behind the two dead men, and the Achaians drew them out of the
battle. So Stichios and goodly Menestheus, leaders of the Athenians,
conveyed Amphimachos back among the host of the Achaians, but Imbrios
the two Aiantes carried, with hearts full of impetuous might. And as
when two lions have snatched away a goat from sharp-toothed hounds, and
carry it through the deep thicket, holding the body on high above the
ground in their jaws, so the two warrior Aiantes held Imbrios aloft and
spoiled his arms. Then the son of Oileus cut his head from his delicate
neck, in wrath for the sake of Amphimachos, and sent it rolling like a
ball through the throng, and it dropped in the dust before the feet of
Hector.

Then verily was Poseidon wroth at heart, when his son’s son fell in the
terrible fray.* So he set forth to go by the huts and the ships of the
Achaians, to spur on the Danaans, and sorrows he was contriving for the
Trojans. Then Idomeneus, spearman renowned, met him on his way from his
comrade that had but newly returned to him out of the battle, wounded
on the knee with the sharp bronze. Him his comrades carried forth, and
Idomeneus gave charge to the leeches, and so went on to his hut, for he
still was eager to face the war. Then the mighty Shaker of the earth
addressed him, in the voice of Thoas, son of Andraimon, that ruled over
the Aitolians in all Pleuron, and mountainous Kalydon, and was honoured
like a god by the people: “Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans,
say, whither have thy threats fared, wherewith the sons of the Achaians
threatened the Trojans?”

* Kteatos, father of Amphimachos, was Poseidon’s son.


Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “O Thaos,
now is there no man to blame, that I wot of, for we all are skilled in
war. Neither is there any man that spiritless fear holds aloof, nor any
that gives place to cowardice, and shuns the cruel war, nay, but even
thus, methinks, must it have seemed good to almighty Kronion, even that
the Achaians should perish nameless here, far away from Argos. But
Thoas, seeing that of old thou wert staunch, and dost spur on some
other man, wheresoever thou mayst see any give ground, therefore
slacken not now, but call aloud to every warrior.”

Then Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth, answered him again: “Idomeneus,
never may that man go forth out of Troy-land, but here may he be the
sport of dogs, who this day wilfully is slack in battle. Nay, come,
take thy weapons and away: herein we must play the man together, if any
avail there may be, though we are no more than two. Ay, and very
cowards get courage from company, but we twain know well how to battle
even with the brave.”

Therewith the god went back again into the strife of men, but
Idomeneus, so soon as he came to his well-builded hut, did on his fair
armour about his body, and grasped two spears, and set forth like the
lightning that Kronion seizes in his hand and brandishes from radiant
Olympus, showing forth a sign to mortal men, and far seen are the
flames thereof. Even so shone the bronze about the breast of Idomeneus
as he ran, and Meriones, his good squire, met him, while he was still
near his hut,—he was going to bring his spear of bronze,—and mighty
Idomeneus spake to him: “Meriones son of Molos, fleet of foot, dearest
of my company, wherefore hast thou come hither and left the war and
strife? Art thou wounded at all, and vexed by a dart’s point, or dost
thou come with a message for me concerning aught? Verily I myself have
no desire to sit in the huts, but to fight.”

Then wise Meriones answered him again, saying: “[Idomeneus, thou
counsellor of the mail-clad Cretans,] I have come to fetch a spear, if
perchance thou hast one left in the huts, for that which before I
carried I have shivered in casting at the shield of proud Deiphobos.”

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “Spears, if
thou wilt, thou shalt find, one, ay, and twenty, standing in the hut,
against the shining side walls, spears of the Trojans whereof I have
spoiled their slain. Yea, it is not my mood to stand and fight with
foemen from afar, wherefore I have spears, and bossy shields, and
helms, and corslets of splendid sheen.”

Then wise Meriones answered him again: “Yea, and in mine own hut and my
black ship are many spoils of the Trojans, but not ready to my hand.
Nay, for methinks that neither am I forgetful of valour; but stand
forth among the foremost to face the glorious war, whensoever ariseth
the strife of battle. Any other, methinks, of the mail-clad Achaians
should sooner forget my prowess, but thou art he that knoweth it.”

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “I know what
a man of valour thou art, wherefore shouldst thou tell me thereof? Nay,
if now beside the ships all the best of us were being chosen for an
ambush—wherein the valour of men is best discerned; there the coward,
and the brave man most plainly declare themselves: for the colour of
the coward changes often, and his spirit cannot abide firm within him,
but now he kneels on one knee, now on the other, and rests on either
foot, and his heart beats noisily in his breast, as he thinks of doom,
and his teeth chatter loudly. But the colour of the brave man does not
change, nor is he greatly afraid, from the moment that he enters the
ambush of heroes, but his prayer is to mingle instantly in woful war.
Were we being chosen for such an ambush, I say, not even then would any
man reckon lightly of thy courage and thy strength. Nay, and even if
thou wert stricken in battle from afar, or smitten in close fight, the
dart would not strike thee in the hinder part of the neck, nor in the
back, but would encounter thy breast or belly, as thou dost press on,
towards the gathering of the foremost fighters. But come, no more let
us talk thus, like children, loitering here, lest any man be vehemently
wroth, but go thou to the hut, and bring the strong spear.”

Thus he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, quickly bare the
spear of bronze from the hut, and went after Idomeneus, with high
thoughts of battle. And even as Ares, the bane of men, goes forth into
the war, and with him follows his dear son Panic, stark and fearless,
that terrifies even the hardy warrior; and these twain leave Thrace,
and harness them for fight with the Ephyri, or the great-hearted
Phlegyans, yet hearken not to both peoples, but give honour to one
only; like these gods did Meriones and Idomeneus, leaders of men, set
forth into the fight, harnessed in gleaming bronze. And Meriones spake
first to Idomeneus saying: “Child of Deukalion, whither art thou eager
to enter into the throng: on the right of all the host, or in the
centre, or on the left? Ay, and no other where, methinks, are the
flowing-haired Achaians so like to fail in fight.”

Then Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, answered him again: “In the
centre of the ships there are others to bear the brunt, the two
Aiantes, and Teukros, the best bowman of the Achaians, ay, and a good
man in close fight; these will give Hector Priam’s son toil enough,
howsoever keen he be for battle; yea, though he be exceeding stalwart.
Hard will he find it, with all his lust for war, to overcome their
strength and their hands invincible, and to fire the ships, unless
Kronion himself send down on the swift ships a burning brand. But not
to a man would he yield, the great Telamonian Aias, to a man that is
mortal and eateth Demeter’s grain, and may be cloven with the sword of
bronze, and with hurling of great stones. Nay, not even to Achilles the
breaker of the ranks of men would he give way, not in close fight; but
for speed of foot none may in any wise strive with Achilles. But guide
us twain, as thou sayest, to the left hand of the host, that speedily
we may learn whether we are to win glory from others, or other men from
us.”

So he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, led the way, till
they came to the host, in that place whither he bade him go.

And when the Trojans saw Idomeneus, strong as flame, and his squire
with him, and their glorious armour, they all shouted and made for him
through the press. Then their mellay began, by the sterns of the ships.
And as the gusts speed on, when shrill winds blow, on a day when dust
lies thickest on the roads, and the winds raise together a great cloud
of dust, even so their battle clashed together, and all were fain of
heart to slay each other in the press with the keen bronze. And the
battle, the bane of men, bristled with the long spears, the piercing
spears they grasped, and the glitter of bronze from gleaming helmets
dazzled the eyes, and the sheen of new-burnished corslets, and shining
shields, as the men thronged all together. Right hardy of heart would
he have been that joyed and sorrowed not at the sight of this labour of
battle.

Thus the two mighty sons of Kronos, with contending will, were
contriving sorrow and anguish for the heroes. Zeus desired victory for
the Trojans and Hector, giving glory to swift-footed Achilles; yet he
did not wish the Achaian host to perish utterly before Ilios, but only
to give renown to Thetis and her strong-hearted son. But Poseidon went
among the Argives and stirred them to war, stealing secretly forth from
the grey salt sea: for he was sore vexed that they were overcome by the
Trojans, and was greatly in wrath against Zeus. Verily both were of the
same lineage and the same place of birth, but Zeus was the elder and
the wiser. Therefore also Poseidon avoided to give open aid, but
secretly ever he spurred them on, throughout the host, in the likeness
of a man. These twain had strained the ends of the cords of strong
strife and equal war, and had stretched them over both Trojans and
Achaians, a knot that none might break nor undo, for the loosening of
the knees of many.

Even then Idomeneus, though his hair was flecked with grey, called on
the Danaans, and leaping among the Trojans, roused their terror. For he
slew Othryoneus of Kabesos, a sojourner there, who but lately had
followed after the rumour of war, and asked in marriage the fairest of
the daughters of Priam, Kassandra, without gifts of wooing, but with
promise of mighty deed, namely that he would drive perforce out of
Troy-land the sons of the Achaians. To him the old man Priam promised
and appointed that he would give her, so he fought trusting in his
promises. And Idomeneus aimed at him with a bright spear, and cast and
smote him as he came proudly striding on, and the corslet of bronze
that he wore availed not, but the lance struck in the midst of his
belly. And he fell with a crash, and Idomeneus boasted over him, and
lifted up his voice, saying: “Othryoneus, verily I praise thee above
all mortal men, if indeed thou shalt accomplish all that thou hast
promised to Priam, son of Dardanos, that promised thee again his own
daughter. Yea, and we likewise would promise as much to thee, and
fulfil it, and would give thee the fairest daughter of the son of
Atreus, and bring her from Argos, and wed her to thee, if only thou
wilt aid us to take the fair-set citadel of Ilios. Nay, follow us that
we may make a covenant of marriage by the seafaring ships, for we are
no hard exacters of gifts of wooing.”

Therewith the hero Idomeneus dragged him by the foot across the fierce
mellay. But Asios came to his aid, on foot before his horses that the
charioteer guided so that still their breath touched the shoulders of
Asios. And the desire of his heart was to cast at Idomeneus, who was
beforehand with him, and smote him with the spear in the throat, below
the chin, and drove the point straight through. And he fell as an oak
falls, or a poplar, or tall pine tree, that craftsmen have felled on
the hills with new whetted axes, to be a ship’s timber, even so he lay
stretched out before the horses and the chariot, groaning, and
clutching the bloody dust. And the charioteer was amazed, and kept not
his wits, as of old, and dared not turn his horses and avoid out of the
hands of foemen; and Antilochos the steadfast in war smote him, and
pierced the middle of his body with a spear. Nothing availed the
corslet of bronze he was wont to wear, but he planted the spear fast in
the midst of his belly. Therewith he fell gasping from the well-wrought
chariot, and Antilochos, the son of great-hearted Nestor, drave the
horses out from the Trojans, among the well-greaved Achaians. Then
Deiphobos, in sorrow for Asios, drew very nigh Idomeneus, and cast at
him with his shining spear. But Idomeneus steadily watching him,
avoided the spear of bronze, being hidden beneath the circle of his
shield, the shield covered about with ox-hide and gleaming bronze, that
he always bore, fitted with two arm-rods: under this he crouched
together, and the spear of bronze flew over. And his shield rang
sharply, as the spear grazed thereon. Yet it flew not vainly from the
heavy hand of Deiphobos, but smote Hypsenor, son of Hippasos, the
shepherd of the hosts, in the liver, beneath the midriff, and instantly
unstrung his knees. And Deiphobos boasted over him terribly, crying
aloud: “Ah, verily, not unavenged lies Asios, nay, methinks, that even
on his road to Hades, strong Warden of the gate, he will rejoice at
heart, since, lo, I have sent him escort for the way!”

So spake he, but grief came on the Argives by reason of his boast, and
stirred above all the soul of the wise-hearted Antilochos, yet, despite
his sorrow, he was not heedless of his dear comrade, but ran and stood
over him, and covered him with his buckler. Then two trusty companions,
Mekisteus, son of Echios, and goodly Alastor, stooped down and lifted
him, and with heavy groaning bare him to the hollow ships.

And Idomeneus relaxed not his mighty force, but ever was striving,
either to cover some one of the Trojans with black night, or himself to
fall in warding off death from the Achaians. There the dear son of
Aisyetes, fosterling of Zeus, even the hero Alkathoos, was slain, who
was son-in-law of Anchises, and had married the eldest of his
daughters, Hippodameia, whom her father and her lady mother dearly
loved in the halls, for she excelled all the maidens of her age in
beauty, and skill, and in wisdom, wherefore the best man in wide Troy
took her to wife. This Alkathoos did Poseidon subdue to Idomeneus,
throwing a spell over his shining eyes, and snaring his glorious limbs;
so that he might neither flee backwards, nor avoid the stroke, but
stood steady as a pillar, or a tree with lofty crown of leaves, when
the hero Idomeneus smote him in the midst of the breast with the spear,
and rent the coat of bronze about him, that aforetime warded death from
his body, but now rang harsh as it was rent by the spear. And he fell
with a crash, and the lance fixed in his heart, that, still beating,
shook the butt-end of the spear. Then at length mighty Ares spent its
fury there; but Idomeneus boasted terribly, and cried aloud:
“Deiphobos, are we to deem it fair acquittal that we have slain three
men for one, since thou boastest thus? Nay, sir, but stand thou up also
thyself against me, that thou mayst know what manner of son of Zeus am
I that have come hither! For Zeus first begat Minos, the warden of
Crete, and Minos got him a son, the noble Deukalion, and Deukalion
begat me, a prince over many men in wide Crete, and now have the ships
brought me hither, a bane to thee and thy father, and all the Trojans.”

Thus he spake, but the thoughts of Deiphobos were divided, whether he
should retreat, and call to his aid some one of the great-hearted
Trojans, or should try the adventure alone. And on this wise to his
mind it seemed the better, to go after Aineias, whom he found standing
the last in the press, for Aineias was ever wroth against goodly Priam,
for that Priam gave him no honour, despite his valour among men. So
Deiphobos stood by him, and spake winged words to him: “Aineias, thou
counsellor of the Trojans, now verily there is great need that thou
shouldst succour thy sister’s husband, if any care for kin doth touch
thee. Nay follow, let us succour Alkathoos, thy sister’s husband, who
of old did cherish thee in his hall, while thou wert but a little one,
and now, lo, spear-famed Idomeneus hath stripped him of his arms!”

So he spake, and roused the spirit in the breast of Aineias, who went
to seek Idomeneus, with high thoughts of war. But fear took not hold
upon Idomeneus, as though he had been some tender boy, but he stood at
bay, like a boar on the hills that trusteth to his strength, and abides
the great assailing throng of men in a lonely place, and he bristles up
his back, and his eyes shine with fire, while he whets his tusks, and
is right eager to keep at bay both men and hounds. Even so stood
spear-famed Idomeneus at bay against Aineias, that came to the rescue,
and gave ground no whit, but called on his comrades, glancing to
Askalaphos, and Aphareus, and Deipyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos,
all masters of the war-cry; them he spurred up to battle, and spake
winged words: “Hither, friends, and rescue me, all alone as I am, and
terribly I dread the onslaught of swift-footed Aineias, that is
assailing me; for he is right strong to destroy men in battle, and he
hath the flower of youth, the greatest avail that may be. Yea, if he
and I were of like age, and in this spirit whereof now we are, speedily
should he or I achieve high victory.”

So he spake, and they all, being of one spirit in their hearts, stood
hard by each other, with buckler laid on shoulder. But Aineias, on the
other side, cried to his comrades, glancing to Deiphobos, and Paris,
and noble Agenor, that with him were leaders of the Trojans; and then
the hosts followed them, as sheep follow their leader to the water from
the pasture, and the shepherd is glad at heart; even so the heart of
Aineias was glad in his breast, when he saw the hosts of the people
following to aid him.

Then they rushed in close fight around Alkathoos with their long
spears, and round their breasts the bronze rang terribly, as they aimed
at each other in the press, while two men of war beyond the rest,
Aineias and Idomeneus, the peers of Ares, were each striving to hew the
flesh of the other with the pitiless bronze. Now Aineias first cast at
Idomeneus, who steadily watching him avoided the spear of bronze, and
the point of Aineias went quivering in the earth, since vainly it had
flown from his stalwart hand. But Idomeneus smote Oinomaos in the midst
of the belly, and brake the plate of his corslet, and the bronze let
forth the bowels through the corslet, and he fell in the dust and
clutched the earth in his palms. And Idomeneus drew forth the
far-shadowing spear from the dead, but could not avail to strip the
rest of the fair armour from his shoulders, for the darts pressed hard
on him. Nay, and his feet no longer served him firmly in a charge, nor
could he rush after his own spear, nor avoid the foe. Wherefore in
close fight he still held off the pitiless day of destiny, but in
retreat his feet no longer bore him swiftly from the battle. And as he
was slowly departing, Deiphobos aimed at him with his shining spear,
for, verily he ever cherished a steadfast hatred against Idomeneus. But
this time, too, he missed him, and smote Askalaphos, the son of
Enyalios, with his dart, and the strong spear passed through his
shoulder, and he fell in the dust, and clutched the earth in his
outstretched hand. But loud-voiced awful Ares was not yet aware at all
that his son had fallen in strong battle, but he was reclining on the
peak of Olympus, beneath the golden clouds, being held there by the
design of Zeus, where also were the other deathless gods, restrained
from the war.

Now the people rushed in close fight around Askalaphos, and Deiphobos
tore from Askalaphos his shining helm, but Meriones, the peer of swift
Ares, leaped forward and smote the arm of Deiphobos with his spear, and
from his hand the vizored casque fell clanging to the ground. And
Meriones sprang forth instantly, like a vulture, and drew the strong
spear from the shoulder of Deiphobos, and fell back among the throng of
his comrades. But the own brother of Deiphobos, Polites, stretched his
hands round his waist, and led him forth from the evil din of war, even
till he came to the swift horses, that waited for him behind the battle
and the fight, with their charioteer, and well-dight chariot. These
bore him heavily groaning to the city, worn with his hurt, and the
blood ran down from his newly wounded arm.

But the rest still were fighting, and the war-cry rose unquenched.
There Aineias rushed on Aphareus, son of Kaletor, and struck his
throat, that chanced to be turned to him, with the keen spear, and his
head dropped down and his shield and helm fell with him, and death that
slays the spirit overwhelmed him. And Antilochos watched Thoon as he
turned the other way, and leaped on him, and wounded him, severing all
the vein that runs up the back till it reaches the neck; this he
severed clean, and Thoon fell on his back in the dust, stretching out
both his hands to his comrades dear. Then Antilochos rushed on, and
stripped the armour from his shoulders, glancing around while the
Trojans gathered from here and there, and smote his wide shining
shield, yet did not avail to graze, behind the shield, the delicate
flesh of Antilochos with the pitiless bronze. For verily Poseidon, the
Shaker of the earth, did guard on every side the son of Nestor, even in
the midst of the javelins. And never did Antilochos get free of the
foe, but turned him about among them, nor ever was his spear at rest,
but always brandished and shaken, and the aim of his heart was to smite
a foeman from afar, or to set on him at close quarters. But as he was
aiming through the crowd, he escaped not the ken of Adamas, son of
Asios, who smote the midst of his shield with the sharp bronze, setting
on nigh at hand; but Poseidon of the dark locks made his shaft of no
avail, grudging him the life of Antilochos. And part of the spear abode
there, like a burned stake, in the shield of Antilochos, and half lay
on the earth, and back retreated Adamas to the ranks of his comrades,
avoiding Fate. But Meriones following after him as he departed, smote
him with a spear between the privy parts and the navel, where a wound
is most baneful to wretched mortals. Even there he fixed the spear in
him and he fell, and writhed about the spear, even as a bull that
herdsmen on the hills drag along perforce when they have bound him with
withes, so he when he was smitten writhed for a moment, not for long,
till the hero Meriones came near, and drew the spear out of his body.
And darkness covered his eyes.

And Helenos in close fight smote Deipyros on the temple, with a great
Thracian sword, and tore away the helm, and the helm, being dislodged,
fell on the ground, and one of the Achaians in the fight picked it up
as it rolled between his feet. But dark night covered the eyes of
Deipyros.

Then grief took hold of the son of Atreus, Menelaos of the loud
war-cry, and he went with a threat against the warrior Helenos, the
prince, shaking his sharp spear, while the other drew the centre-piece
of his bow. And both at once were making ready to let fly, one with his
sharp spear, the other with the arrow from the string. Then the son of
Priam smote Menelaos on the breast with his arrow, on the plate of the
corslet, and off flew the bitter arrow. Even as from a broad shovel in
a great threshing floor, fly the black-skinned beans and pulse, before
the whistling wind, and the stress of the winnower’s shovel, even so
from the corslet of the renowned Menelaos flew glancing far aside the
bitter arrow. But the son of Atreus, Menelaos of the loud war-cry,
smote the hand of Helenos wherein he held the polished bow, and into
the bow, clean through the hand, was driven the spear of bronze. Back
he withdrew to the ranks of his comrades, avoiding Fate, with his hand
hanging down at his side, for the ashen spear dragged after him. And
the great-hearted Agenor drew the spear from his hand, and himself
bound up the hand with a band of twisted sheep’s-wool, a sling that a
squire carried for him, the shepherd of the host.

Then Peisandros made straight for renowned Menelaos, but an evil Fate
was leading him to the end of Death; by thee, Menelaos, to be overcome
in the dread strife of battle. Now when the twain had come nigh in
onset upon each other, the son of Atreus missed, and his spear was
turned aside, but Peisandros smote the shield of renowned Menelaos, yet
availed not to drive the bronze clean through, for the wide shield
caught it, and the spear brake in the socket, yet Peisandros rejoiced
in his heart, and hoped for the victory. But the son of Atreus drew his
silver-studded sword, and leaped upon Peisandros. And Peisandros, under
his shield, clutched his goodly axe of fine bronze, with long and
polished haft of olive-wood, and the twain set upon each other. Then
Peisandros smote the crest of the helmet shaded with horse hair, close
below the very plume, but Menelaos struck the other, as he came
forward, on the brow, above the base of the nose, and the bones
cracked, and the eyes, all bloody, fell at his feet in the dust. Then
he bowed and fell, and Menelaos set his foot on his breast, and
stripped him of his arms, and triumphed, saying: “Even thus then
surely, ye will leave the ships of the Danaans of the swift steeds, ye
Trojans overweening, insatiate of the dread din of war. Yea, and ye
shall not lack all other reproof and shame, wherewith ye made me
ashamed, ye hounds of evil, having no fear in your hearts of the strong
wrath of loud-thundering Zeus, the god of guest and host, who one day
will destroy your steep citadel. O ye that wantonly carried away my
wedded wife and many of my possessions, when ye were entertained by
her, now again ye are fain to throw ruinous fire on the seafaring
ships, and to slay the Achaian heroes. Nay, but ye will yet refrain you
from battle, for as eager as ye be. O father Zeus, verily they say that
thou dost excel in wisdom all others, both gods and men, and all these
things are from thee. How wondrously art thou favouring men of
violence, even the Trojans, whose might is ever iniquitous, nor can
they have their fill of the din of equal war. Of all things there is
satiety, yea, even of love and sleep, and of sweet song, and dance
delectable, whereof a man would sooner have his fill than of war, but
the Trojans are insatiable of battle.”

Thus noble Menelaos spake, and stripped the bloody arms from the body,
and gave them to his comrades, and instantly himself went forth again,
and mingled in the forefront of the battle. Then Harpalion, the son of
king Pylaimenes, leaped out against him, Harpalion that followed his
dear father to Troy, to the war, nor ever came again to his own
country. He then smote the middle of the shield of Atreus’ son with his
spear, in close fight, yet availed not to drive the bronze clean
through, but fell back into the host of his comrades, avoiding Fate,
glancing round every way, lest one should wound his flesh with the
bronze. But Meriones shot at him as he retreated with a bronze-shod
arrow, and smote him in the right buttock, and the arrow went right
through the bladder and came out under the bone. And sitting down, even
there, in the arms of his dear comrades, he breathed away his soul,
lying stretched like a worm on the earth, and out flowed the black
blood, and wetted the ground. And the Paphlagonians great of heart,
tended him busily, and set him in a chariot, and drove him to sacred
Ilios sorrowing, and with them went his father, shedding tears, and
there was no atonement for his dead son.

Now Paris was very wroth at heart by reason of his slaying, for he had
been his host among the many Paphlagonions, wherefore, in wrath for his
sake, he let fly a bronze-shod arrow. Now there was a certain Euchenor,
the son of Polyidos the seer, a rich man and a good, whose dwelling was
in Corinth. And well he knew his own ruinous fate, when he went on
ship-board, for often would the old man, the good Polyidos, tell him,
that he must either perish of a sore disease in his halls, or go with
the ships of the Achaians, and be overcome by the Trojans. Wherefore he
avoided at once the heavy war-fine of the Achaians, and the hateful
disease, that so he might not know any anguish. This man did Paris
smite beneath the jaw and under the ear, and swiftly his spirit
departed from his limbs, and, lo, dread darkness overshadowed him.

So they fought like flaming fire, but Hector, beloved of Zeus, had not
heard nor knew at all that, on the left of the ships, his host was
being subdued by the Argives, and soon would the Achaians have won
renown, so mighty was the Holder and Shaker of the earth that urged on
the Argives; yea, and himself mightily defended them. But Hector kept
where at first he had leaped within the walls and the gate, and broken
the serried ranks of shield-bearing Danaans, even where were the ships
of Aias and Protesilaos, drawn up on the beach of the hoary sea, while
above the wall was builded lowest, and thereby chiefly the heroes and
their horses were raging in battle.

There the Boiotians, and Ionians with trailing tunics, and Lokrians and
Phthians and illustrious Epeians scarcely availed to stay his onslaught
on the ships, nor yet could they drive back from them noble Hector,
like a flame of fire. And there were the picked men of the Athenians;
among them Menestheus son of Peteos was the leader; and there followed
with him Pheidas and Stichios, and brave Bias, while the Epeians were
led by Meges, son of Phyleus, and Amphion and Drakios, and in front of
the Phthians were Medon, and Podarkes resolute in war. Now the one,
Medon, was the bastard son of noble Oileus, and brother of Aias, and he
dwelt in Phylake, far from his own country, for that he had slain a
man, the brother of his stepmother Eriopis, wife of Oileus. But the
other, Podarkes, was the son of Iphiklos son of Phylakos, and they in
their armour, in the van of the great-hearted Phthians, were defending
the ships, and fighting among the Boiotians.

Now never at all did Aias, the swift son of Oileus, depart from the
side of Aias, son of Telamon, nay, not for an instant, but even as in
fallow land two wine-dark oxen with equal heart strain at the shapen
plough, and round the roots of their horns springeth up abundant sweat,
and nought sunders them but the polished yoke, as they labour through
the furrow, till the end of the furrow brings them up, so stood the two
Aiantes close by each other. Now verily did many and noble hosts of his
comrades follow with the son of Telamon, and bore his shield when
labour and sweat came upon his limbs. But the Lokrians followed not
with the high-hearted son of Oileus, for their hearts were not
steadfast in close brunt of battle, seeing that they had no helmets of
bronze, shadowy with horse-hair plumes, nor round shields, nor ashen
spears, but trusting in bows and well-twisted slings of sheep’s wool,
they followed with him to Ilios. Therewith, in the war, they shot thick
and fast, and brake the ranks of the Trojans. So the one party in
front, with their well-dight arms contended with the Trojans, and with
Hector arrayed in bronze, while the others from behind kept shooting
from their ambush, and the Trojans lost all memory of the joy of
battle, for the arrows confounded them.

There then right ruefully from the ships and the huts would the Trojans
have withdrawn to windy Ilios, had not Polydamas come near valiant
Hector and said: “Hector, thou art hard to be persuaded by them that
would counsel thee; for that god has given thee excellence in the works
of war, therefore in council also thou art fain to excel other men in
knowledge. But in nowise wilt thou be able to take everything on
thyself. For to one man has god given for his portion the works of war,
[to another the dance, to another the lute and song,] but in the heart
of yet another hath far-seeing Zeus placed an excellent understanding,
whereof many men get gain, yea he saveth many an one, and himself best
knoweth it. But, lo, I will speak even as it seemeth best to me. Behold
all about thee the circle of war is blazing, but the great-hearted
Trojans, now that they have got down the wall, are some with their arms
standing aloof and some are fighting, few men against a host, being
scattered among the ships. Nay, withdraw thee, and call hither all the
best of the warriors. Thereafter shall we take all counsel carefully,
whether we should fall on the ships of many benches, if indeed god
willeth to give us victory, or after counsel held, should return
unharmed from the ships. For verily I fear lest the Achaians repay
their debt of yesterday, since by the ships there tarrieth a man
insatiate of war, and never, methinks, will he wholly stand aloof from
battle.”

So spake Polydamas, and his safe counsel pleased Hector well, who
[straightaway sprang to earth from the chariot with his arms, and]
spake to him winged words and said: “Polydamas, do thou stay here all
the best of the host, but I will go thither to face the war, and
swiftly will return again, when I have straitly laid on them my
commands.”

So he spake, and set forth, in semblance like a snowy mountain, and
shouting aloud he flew through the Trojans and allies. And they all
sped to Polydamas, the kindly son of Panthoos, when they heard the
voice of Hector. But he went seeking Deiphobos, and the strong prince
Helenos, and Adamas son of Asios, and Asios son of Hyrtakos, among the
warriors in the foremost line, if anywhere he might find them. But them
he found not at all unharmed, nor free of bane, but, lo, some among the
sterns of the ships of the Achaians lay lifeless, slain by the hands of
the Argives, and some were within the wall wounded by thrust or cast.
But one he readily found, on the left of the dolorous battle, goodly
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, heartening his comrades and
speeding them to war. And he drew near to him, and addressed him with
words of shame: “Thou evil Paris, fairest of face, thou that lustest
for women, thou seducer, where, prithee, are Deiphobos, and the strong
prince Helenos, and Adamas son of Asios, and Asios son of Hyrtakos, and
where is Othryoneus? Now hath all high Ilios perished utterly. Now,
too, thou seest, is sheer destruction sure.”

Then godlike Alexandros answered him again saying: “Hector, since thy
mind is to blame one that is blameless, some other day might I rather
withdraw me from the war, since my mother bare not even me wholly a
coward. For from the time that thou didst gather the battle of thy
comrades about the ships, from that hour do we abide here, and war with
the Danaans ceaselessly; and our comrades concerning whom thou
inquirest are slain. Only Deiphobos and the strong prince Helenos have
both withdrawn, both of them being wounded in the hand with long
spears, for Kronion kept death away from them. But now lead on,
wheresoever thy heart and spirit bid thee, and we will follow with thee
eagerly, nor methinks shall we lack for valour, as far as we have
strength; but beyond his strength may no man fight, howsoever eager he
be.”

So spake the hero, and persuaded his brother’s heart, and they went
forth where the war and din were thickest, round Kebriones, and noble
Polydamas, and Phalkes, and Orthaios, and godlike Polyphetes, and
Palmys, and Askanios, and Morys, son of Hippotion, who had come in
their turn, out of deep-soiled Askanie, on the morn before, and now
Zeus urged them to fight. And these set forth like the blast of violent
winds, that rushes earthward beneath the thunder of father Zeus, and
with marvellous din doth mingle with the salt sea, and therein are many
swelling waves of the loud roaring sea, arched over and white with
foam, some vanward, others in the rear; even so the Trojans arrayed in
van and rear and shining with bronze, followed after their leaders. And
Hector son of Priam was leading them, the peer of Ares, the bane of
men. In front he held the circle of his shield, thick with hides, and
plates of beaten bronze, and on his temples swayed his shining helm.
And everywhere he went in advance and made trial of the ranks, if
perchance they would yield to him as he charged under cover of his
shield. But he could not confound the heart within the breast of the
Achaians. And Aias, stalking with long strides, challenged him first:
“Sir, draw nigh, wherefore dost thou vainly try to dismay the Argives?
We are in no wise ignorant of war, but by the cruel scourge of Zeus are
we Achaians vanquished. Surely now thy heart hopes utterly to spoil the
ships, but we too have hands presently to hold our own. Verily your
peopled city will long ere that beneath our hands be taken and sacked.
But for thee, I tell thee that the time is at hand, when thou shalt
pray in thy flight to father Zeus, and the other immortal gods, that
thy fair-maned steeds may be fleeter than falcons: thy steeds that are
to bear thee to the city, as they storm in dust across the plain.”

And even as he spake, a bird flew forth on the right hand, an eagle of
lofty flight, and the host of the Achaians shouted thereat, encouraged
by the omen, but renowned Hector answered: “Aias, thou blundering
boaster, what sayest thou! Would that indeed I were for ever as surely
the son of aegis-bearing Zeus, and that my mother were lady Hera, and
that I were held in such honour as Apollo and Athene, as verily this
day is to bring utter evil on all the Argives! And thou among them
shalt be slain, if thou hast the heart to await my long spear, which
shall rend thy lily skin, and thou shalt glut with thy fat and flesh
the birds and dogs of the Trojans, falling among the ships of the
Achaians.”

So he spake and led the way, and they followed with wondrous din, and
the whole host shouted behind. And the Argives on the other side
answered with a shout, and forgot not their valiance, but abode the
onslaught of the bravest of the Trojans. And the cry of the two hosts
went up through the higher air, to the splendour of Zeus.




BOOK XIV.


How Sleep and Hera beguiled Zeus to slumber on the heights of Ida, and
Poseidon spurred on the Achaians to resist Hector, and how Hector was
wounded.


Yet the cry of battle escaped not Nestor, albeit at his wine, but he
spake winged words to the son of Asklepios: “Bethink thee, noble
Machaon, what had best be done; lo, louder waxes the cry of the strong
warriors by the ships. Nay, now sit where thou art, and drink the
bright wine, till Hekamede of the fair tresses shall heat warm water
for the bath, and wash away the clotted blood, but I will speedily go
forth and come to a place of outlook.”

Therewith he took the well-wrought shield of his son, horse-taming
Thrasymedes, which was lying in the hut, all glistering with bronze,
for the son had the shield of his father. And he seized a strong spear,
with a point of keen bronze, and stood outside the hut, and straightway
beheld a deed of shame, the Achaians fleeing in rout, and the
high-hearted Trojans driving them, and the wall of the Achaians was
overthrown. And as when the great sea is troubled with a dumb wave, and
dimly bodes the sudden paths of the shrill winds, but is still unmoved
nor yet rolled forward or to either side, until some steady gale comes
down from Zeus, even so the old man pondered,—his mind divided this way
and that,—whether he should fare into the press of the Danaans of the
swift steeds, or go after Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of the
host. And thus as he pondered, it seemed to him the better counsel to
go to the son of Atreus. Meanwhile they were warring and slaying each
other, and the stout bronze rang about their bodies as they were thrust
with swords and double-pointed spears.

Now the kings, the fosterlings of Zeus, encountered Nestor, as they
went up from the ships, even they that were wounded with the bronze,
Tydeus’ son, and Odysseus, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus. For far apart
from the battle were their ships drawn up, on the shore of the grey
sea, for these were the first they had drawn up to the plain, but had
builded the wall in front of the hindmost. For in no wise might the
beach, for as wide as it was, hold all the ships, and the host was
straitened. Wherefore they drew up the ships row within row, and filled
up the wide mouth of all the shore that the headlands held between
them. Therefore the kings were going together, leaning on their spears,
to look on the war and fray, and the heart of each was sore within his
breast. And the old man met them, even Nestor, and caused the spirit to
fail within the breasts of the Achaians.

And mighty Agamemnon spake and accosted him: “O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Achaians, wherefore dost thou come hither and hast
deserted the war, the bane of men? Lo, I fear the accomplishment of the
word that dread Hector spake, and the threat wherewith he threatened
us, speaking in the assembly of the Trojans, namely, that never would
he return to Ilios from the ships, till he had burned the ships with
fire, and slain the men. Even so he spake, and, lo, now all these
things are being fulfilled. Alas, surely even the other well-greaved
Achaians store wrath against me in their hearts, like Achilles, and
have no desire to fight by the rearmost ships.”

Then Nestor of Gerenia the knight answered him saying “Verily these
things are now at hand, and being accomplished, nor otherwise could
Zeus himself contrive them, he that thundereth on high. For, lo, the
wall is overthrown, wherein we trusted that it should be an unbroken
bulwark of the ships and of our own bodies. And these men by the swift
ships have endless battle without sparing, and no more couldst thou
tell, howsoever closely thou mightst spy, from what side the Achaians
are driven in rout, so confusedly are they slain, and the cry of battle
goeth up to heaven. But let us take counsel, how these things may best
be done, if wit may do aught: but into the war I counsel not that we
should go down, for in no wise may a wounded man do battle.”

Then Agamemnon king of men answered him again: “Nestor, for that they
are warring by the rearmost ships, and the well-builded wall hath
availed not, nor the trench, whereat the Achaians endured so much
labour, hoping in their hearts that it should be the unbroken bulwark
of the ships, and of their own bodies—such it seemeth must be the will
of Zeus supreme, [that the Achaians should perish here nameless far
from Argos]. For I knew it when he was forward to aid the Danaans, and
now I know that he is giving to the Trojans glory like that of the
blessed gods, and hath bound our hands and our strength. But come, as I
declare, let us all obey. Let us drag down the ships that are drawn up
in the first line near to the sea, and speed them all forth to the salt
sea divine, and moor them far out with stones, till the divine night
comes, if even at night the Trojans will refrain from war, and then
might we drag down all the ships. For there is no shame in fleeing from
ruin, yea, even in the night. Better doth he fare who flees from
trouble, than he that is overtaken.”

Then, looking on him sternly, spake Odysseus of many counsels: “Atreus’
son, what word hath passed the door of thy lips? Man of mischief, sure
thou shouldst lead some other inglorious army, not be king among us, to
whom Zeus hath given it, from youth even unto age, to wind the skein of
grievous wars, till every man of us perish. Art thou indeed so eager to
leave the wide-wayed city of the Trojans, the city for which we endure
with sorrow so many evils? Be silent, lest some other of the Achaians
hear this word, that no man should so much as suffer to pass through
his mouth, none that understandeth in his heart how to speak fit
counsel, none that is a sceptred king, and hath hosts obeying him so
many as the Argives over whom thou reignest. And now I wholly scorn thy
thoughts, such a word as thou hast uttered, thou that, in the midst of
war and battle, dost bid us draw down the well-timbered ships to the
sea, that even more than ever the Trojans may possess their desire,
albeit they win the mastery even now, and sheer destruction fall upon
us. For the Achaians will not make good the war, when the ships are
drawn down to the salt sea, but will look round about to flee, and
withdraw from battle. There will thy counsel work a mischief, O marshal
of the host!”

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: “Odysseus, right sharply
hast thou touched my heart with thy stern reproof: nay, I do not bid
the sons of the Achaians to drag, against their will, the well-timbered
ships to the salt sea. Now perchance there may be one who will utter a
wiser counsel than this of mine,—a young man or an old,—welcome would
it be to me.”

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake also among them: “The man is
near,—not long shall we seek him, if ye be willing to be persuaded of
me, and each of you be not resentful at all, because in years I am the
youngest among you. Nay, but I too boast me to come by lineage of a
noble sire, Tydeus, whom in Thebes the piled-up earth doth cover. For
Portheus had three well-born children, and they dwelt in Pleuron, and
steep Kalydon, even Agrios and Melas, and the third was Oineus the
knight, the father of my father, and in valour he excelled the others.
And there he abode, but my father dwelt at Argos, whither he had
wandered, for so Zeus and the other gods willed that it should be. And
he wedded one of the daughters of Adrastos, and dwelt in a house full
of livelihood, and had wheat-bearing fields enow, and many orchards of
trees apart, and many sheep were his, and in skill with the spear he
excelled all the Achaians: these things ye must have heard, if I speak
sooth. Therefore ye could not say that I am weak and a coward by
lineage, and so dishonour my spoken counsel, that well I may speak. Let
us go down to the battle, wounded as we are, since we needs must; and
then might we hold ourselves aloof from the battle, beyond the range of
darts, lest any take wound upon wound; but the others will we spur on,
even them that aforetime gave place to their passion, and stand apart,
and fight not.”

So he spake, and they all heard him readily, and obeyed him. And they
set forth, led by Agamemnon the king of men.

Now the renowned Earth-shaker held no vain watch, but went with them in
the guise of an ancient man, and he seized the right hand of Agamemnon,
Atreus’ son, and uttering winged words he spake to him, saying:
“Atreides, now methinks the ruinous heart of Achilles rejoices in his
breast, as he beholds the slaughter and flight of the Achaians, since
he hath no wisdom, not a grain. Nay, even so may he perish likewise,
and god mar him. But with thee the blessed gods are not utterly wroth,
nay, even yet methinks the leaders and rulers of the Trojans will cover
the wide plain with dust, and thyself shalt see them fleeing to the
city from the ships and the huts.”

So spake he, and shouted mightily, as he sped over the plain. And loud
as nine thousand men, or ten thousand cry in battle, when they join the
strife of war, so mighty was the cry that the strong Shaker of the
earth sent forth from his breast, and great strength he put into the
heart of each of the Achaians, to strive and war unceasingly.

Now Hera of the golden throne stood on the peak of Olympus, and saw
with her eyes, and anon knew him that was her brother and her lord’s
going to and fro through the glorious fight, and she rejoiced in her
heart. And she beheld Zeus sitting on the topmost crest of
many-fountained Ida, and to her heart he was hateful. Then she took
thought, the ox-eyed lady Hera, how she might beguile the mind of
aegis-bearing Zeus. And this seemed to her in her heart to be the best
counsel, namely to fare to Ida, when she had well adorned herself, if
perchance he would desire to sleep beside her and embrace her body in
love, and a sweet sleep and a kindly she could pour on his eyelids and
his crafty wits. And she set forth to her bower, that her dear son
Hephaistos had fashioned, and therein had made fast strong doors on the
pillars, with a secret bolt, that no other god might open. There did
she enter in and closed the shining doors. With ambrosia first did she
cleanse every stain from her winsome body, and anointed her with olive
oil, ambrosial, soft, and of a sweet savour; if it were but shaken, in
the bronze-floored mansion of Zeus, the savour thereof went right forth
to earth and heaven. Therewith she anointed her fair body, and combed
her hair, and with her hands plaited her shining tresses, fair and
ambrosial, flowing from her immortal head. Then she clad her in her
fragrant robe that Athene wrought delicately for her, and therein set
many things beautifully made, and fastened it over her breast with
clasps of gold. And she girdled it with a girdle arrayed with a hundred
tassels, and she set earrings in her pierced ears, earrings of three
drops, and glistering, therefrom shone grace abundantly. And with a
veil over all the peerless goddess veiled herself, a fair new veil,
bright as the sun, and beneath her shining feet she bound goodly
sandals. But when she had adorned her body with all her array, she went
forth from her bower, and called Aphrodite apart from the other gods,
and spake to her, saying: “Wilt thou obey me, dear child, in that which
I shall tell thee? or wilt thou refuse, with a grudge in thy heart,
because I succour the Danaans, and thou the Trojans?”

Then Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus answered her: “Hera, goddess queen,
daughter of mighty Kronos, say the thing that is in thy mind, my heart
bids me fulfil it, if fulfil it I may, and if it may be accomplished.”

Then with crafty purpose the lady Hera answered her: “Give me now Love
and Desire wherewith thou dost overcome all the Immortals, and mortal
men. For I am going to visit the limits of the bountiful Earth, and
Okeanos, father of the gods, and mother Tethys, who reared me well and
nourished me in their halls, having taken me from Rhea, when far-seeing
Zeus imprisoned Kronos beneath the earth and the unvintaged sea. Them
am I going to visit, and their endless strife will I loose, for already
this long time they hold apart from each other, apart from love and the
marriage bed, since wrath hath settled in their hearts. If with words I
might persuade their hearts, and bring them back to love and the
marriage bed, ever should I be called dear to them and worshipful.”

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite answered her again: “It may not be, nor
seemly were it to deny that thou askest, for thou sleepest in the arms
of Zeus, the chief of gods.”

Therewith from her breast she loosed the broidered girdle,
fair-wrought, wherein are all her enchantments; therein are love, and
desire, and loving converse, that steals the wits even of the wise.
This girdle she laid in her hands, and spake, and said: “Lo now, take
this girdle and lay it up in thy bosom, this fair-wrought girdle,
wherein all things are fashioned; methinks thou wilt not return with
that unaccomplished, which in thy heart thou desirest.”

So spake she, and the ox-eyed lady Hera smiled, and smiling laid up the
zone within her breast.

Then the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, went to her house, and Hera,
rushing down, left the peak of Olympus, and touched on Pieria and
pleasant Emathia, and sped over the snowy hills of the Thracian
horsemen, even over the topmost crests, nor grazed the ground with her
feet, and from Athos she fared across the foaming sea, and came to
Lemnos, the city of godlike Thoas. There she met Sleep, the brother of
Death, and clasped her hand in his, and spake and called him by name:
“Sleep, lord of all gods and of all men, if ever thou didst hear my
word, obey me again even now, and I will be grateful to thee always.
Lull me, I pray thee, the shining eyes of Zeus beneath his brows, so
soon as I have laid me down by him in love. And gifts I will give to
thee, even a fair throne, imperishable for ever, a golden throne, that
Hephaistos the Lame, mine own child, shall fashion skilfully, and will
set beneath it a footstool for the feet, for thee to set thy shining
feet upon, when thou art at a festival.”

Then sweet Sleep answered her and said: “Hera, goddess and queen,
daughter of mighty Kronos, another of the eternal gods might I lightly
lull to slumber, yea, were it the streams of Okeanos himself, that is
the father of them all. But to Zeus the son of Kronos might I not draw
near, nor lull him to slumber, unless himself commanded it. For ere now
did a behest of thine teach me a lesson, on the day when that famed
high-hearted son of Zeus sailed from Ilios, when he had sacked the city
of the Trojans. Then verily I lulled the soul of aegis-bearing Zeus,
with my sweet influence poured about him, and thou didst contrive evil
against him in thy heart, and didst rouse over the sea the blasts of
violent winds, and Herakles thou then didst bear to well-peopled Kos,
far from all his friends. But Zeus, when he wakened, was wrathful, and
dashed the gods about his mansion, and me above all he sought, and he
would have cast me from the upper air to perish in the deep, if Night
had not saved me, Night, that subdues both gods and men. To her I came
as a suppliant in my flight, and he ceased from pursuing, wrathful as
he was, for he was in awe of doing aught displeasing to swift Night.
And now again thou biddest me accomplish this other task that may not
be accomplished.”

Then the ox-eyed lady Hera answered him again: “Sleep, wherefore dost
thou consider these things in thy heart? dost thou deem that Zeus of
the far-borne voice will succour the Trojans even as he was wroth for
the sake of Herakles, his own child? Nay come, and I will give thee one
of the younger of the Graces, to wed and to be called thy wife [even
Pasithea, that ever thou longest for all thy days].”

So she spake, and Sleep was glad, and answered and said: “Come now,
swear to me by the inviolable water of Styx, and with one of thy hands
grasp the bounteous earth, and with the other the shining sea, that all
may be witnesses to us, even all the gods below that are with Kronos,
that verily thou wilt give me one of the younger of the Graces, even
Pasithea, that myself do long for all my days.”

So spake he, nor did she disobey, the white-armed goddess Hera; she
sware as he bade her, and called all the gods by name, even those below
Tartaros that are called Titans. But when she had sworn and ended that
oath, the twain left the citadel of Lemnos, and of Imbros, clothed on
in mist, and swiftly they accomplished the way. To many-fountained Ida
they came, the mother of wild beasts, to Lekton, where first they left
the sea, and they twain fared above the dry land, and the topmost
forest waved beneath their feet. There Sleep halted, ere the eyes of
Zeus beheld him, and alighted on a tall pine tree, the loftiest pine
that then in all Ida rose through the nether to the upper air. Therein
sat he, hidden by the branches of the pine, in the likeness of the
shrill bird that on the mountains the gods call _chalkis_, but men
_kymindis_.* But Hera swiftly drew nigh to topmost Gargaros, the
highest crest of Ida, and Zeus the cloud-gatherer beheld her. And as he
saw her, so love came over his deep heart, even as when first they
mingled with each other in delight, and went together to the couch,
their dear parents knowing it not. And he stood before her, and spoke,
and said: “Hera, with what desire comest thou thus hither from Olympus,
and thy horses and chariot are not here, whereon thou mightst ascend?”

* The names of Night-jar, Goat-sucker, Doehawk, and Fern-owl are given
in Bewick for this bird, which is really a kind of swift.—R. W. R.


Then with crafty purpose lady Hera answered him: “I am going to visit
the limits of the bountiful Earth, and Okeanos, father of the gods, and
mother Tethys, who reared me well and cherished me in their halls. Them
am I going to visit, and their endless strife will I loose, for already
this long time they hold apart from each other, from love and the
marriage bed, since wrath hath settled in their hearts. But my horses
are standing at the foot of many-fountained Ida, my horses that shall
bear me over wet and dry. And now it is because of thee that I am thus
come hither, down from Olympus, lest perchance thou mightest be wroth
with me hereafter, if silently I were gone to the mansion of
deep-flowing Okeanos.”

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, answered her and said: “Hera,
thither mayst thou go on a later day. But come let us twain take
pleasure in the bed of love. For never once as thus did the love of
goddess or woman so mightily overflow and conquer the heart within my
breast. Not when I loved the wife of Ixion, who bore Pirithoos, the
peer of gods in counsel, nor when I loved Danae of the fair ankles,
daughter of Akrisios, who bore Perseus, most renowned of all men, nor
when I loved the famed daughter of Phoinix, who bore me Minos, and
godlike Rhadamanthys, nay, nor even when I loved Semele, nor Alkmene in
Thebes, and she bore Herakles, a child hardy of heart, but Semele bore
Dionysos, a delight to mortals, nay, nor when I loved the fair-tressed
queen, Demeter, nor renowned Leto, nay, nor thy very self, as now I
love thee, and sweet desire possesses me.”

And him the lady Hera answered with crafty purpose: “Most dread son of
Kronos, what a word thou hast spoken! If now thou dost long to be
couched in love on the crests of Ida, and all stands plain to view, how
would it be if someone of the eternal gods should see us slumbering,
and go and tell it to all the gods? It is not I that could arise from
the couch and go again to thy house, nay, it would be a thing for
righteous anger. But if thou wilt, and it is dear to thy heart, thou
hast a chamber that thine own son Hephaistos builded, and fastened
strong doors to the pillars, thither let us go and lie down, if the
couch be thy desire.”

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered her and said: “Hera, fear not
lest any god, or any man should spy the thing, so great a golden cloud
will I cast all over thee. Nay, methinks not even the sun might see
through it, the sun, whose light is keenest of all to behold.”

So spake he, and the son of Kronos clasped his consort in his arms. And
beneath them the divine earth sent forth fresh new grass, and dewy
lotus, and crocus, and hyacinth, thick and soft, that raised them aloft
from the ground. Therein they lay, and were clad on with a fair golden
cloud, whence fell drops of glittering dew.

Thus slept the Father in quiet on the crest of Gargaros, by Sleep and
love overcome, with his bedfellow in his arms. But sweet Sleep started
and ran to the ships of the Achaians, to tell his tidings to the god
that holdeth and shaketh the earth. And he stood near him, and spake
winged words: “Eagerly now, Poseidon, do thou aid the Danaans, and give
them glory for a little space, while yet Zeus sleepeth, for over him
have I shed soft slumber, and Hera hath beguiled him to couch in love.”

So he spake, and passed to the renowned tribes of men, and still the
more did he set on Poseidon to aid the Danaans, who straightway sprang
far afront of the foremost, and called to them: “Argives, are we again
to yield the victory to Hector, son of Priam, that he may take our
ships and win renown? Nay, even so he saith and declareth that he will
do, for that Achilles by the hollow ships abides angered at heart. But
for him there will be no such extreme regret, if we spur us on to aid
each the other. Nay come, as I command, let us all obey. Let us harness
us in the best shields that are in the host, and the greatest, and
cover our heads with shining helms, and take the longest spears in our
hands, and so go forth. Yea, and I will lead the way, and methinks that
Hector, son of Priam, will not long await us, for all his eagerness.
And whatsoever man is steadfast in battle, and hath a small buckler on
his shoulder, let him give it to a worse man, and harness him in a
larger shield.”

So spake he, and they heard him eagerly and obeyed him. And them the
kings themselves arrayed, wounded as they were, Tydeus’ son, and
Odysseus, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus. They went through all the host,
and made exchange of weapons of war. The good arms did the good warrior
harness him in, the worse he gave to the worse. But when they had done
on the shining bronze about their bodies, they started on the march,
and Poseidon led them, the Shaker of the earth, with a dread sword of
fine edge in his strong hand, like unto lightning; wherewith it is not
permitted that any should mingle in woful war, but fear holds men afar
therefrom. But the Trojans on the other side was renowned Hector
arraying. Then did they now strain the fiercest strife of war, even
dark-haired Poseidon and glorious Hector, one succouring the Trojans,
the other with the Argives. And the sea washed up to the huts and ships
of the Argives, and they gathered together with a mighty cry. Not so
loudly bellows the wave of the sea against the land, stirred up from
the deep by the harsh breath of the north wind, nor so loud is the roar
of burning fire in the glades of a mountain, when it springs to burn up
the forest, nor calls the wind so loudly in the high leafy tresses of
the trees, when it rages and roars its loudest, as then was the cry of
the Trojans and Achaians, shouting dreadfully as they rushed upon each
other.

First glorious Hector cast with his spear at Aias, who was facing him
full, and did not miss, striking him where two belts were stretched
across his breast, the belt of his shield, and of his silver-studded
sword; these guarded his tender flesh. And Hector was enraged because
his swift spear had flown vainly from his hand, and he retreated into
the throng of his fellows, avoiding Fate.

Then as he was departing the great Telamonian Aias smote him with a
huge stone; for many stones, the props of swift ships, were rolled
among the feet of the fighters; one of these he lifted, and smote
Hector on the breast, over the shield-rim, near the neck, and made him
spin like a top with the blow, that he reeled round and round. And even
as when an oak falls uprooted beneath the stroke of father Zeus, and a
dread savour of brimstone arises therefrom, and whoso stands near and
beholds it has no more courage, for dread is the bolt of great Zeus,
even so fell mighty Hector straightway in the dust. And the spear fell
from his hand, but his shield and helm were made fast to him, and round
him rang his arms adorned with bronze.

Then with a loud cry they ran up, the sons of the Achaians, hoping to
drag him away, and they cast showers of darts. But not one availed to
wound or smite the shepherd of the host, before that might be the
bravest gathered about him, Polydamas, and Aineias, and goodly Agenor,
and Sarpedon, leader of the Lykians, and noble Glaukos, and of the rest
not one was heedless of him, but they held their round shields in front
of him, and his comrades lifted him in their arms, and bare him out of
the battle, till he reached his swift horses that were standing waiting
for him, with the charioteer and the fair-dight chariot at the rear of
the combat and the war. These toward the city bore him heavily moaning.
Now when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, of eddying
Xanthos, that immortal Zeus begat, there they lifted him from the
chariot to the ground, and poured water over him, and he gat back his
breath, and looked up with his eyes, and sitting on his heels kneeling,
he vomited black blood. Then again he sank back on the ground, and
black night covered his eyes, the stroke still conquering his spirit.

Now the Argives when they saw Hector departed rushed yet the more upon
the Trojans, and were mindful of the delight of battle. There far the
foremost did swift Aias, son of Oileus, leap on Satnios, son of Enops,
and wounded him with his sharp spear; Satnios whom the fair Naiad-nymph
bore to Enops as he herded his flocks by the banks of Satnioeis. Him
did the spear-famed son of Oileus draw nigh, and wounded him on the
flank, and he fell, and round him did Trojans and Danaans join in
strong battle. Then to his aid came Polydamas, the wielder of the
spear, son of Panthoos, and smote Prothoenor on the right shoulder,
Prothoenor, son of Areïlykos, and through his shoulder went the mighty
spear, and he fell in the dust, and clutched the earth with his palm.
And Polydamas boasted over him terribly, crying aloud: “Verily methinks
that again from the strong hand of the high-hearted son of Panthoos,
the spear hath not leaped in vain. Nay, one of the Argives hath caught
it in his flesh, and leaning thereon for a staff, methinks that he will
go down within the house of Hades.”

So spake he, and sorrow came on the Argives by reason of his boasting.
And chiefly he roused the wrath of the wise son of Telamon, Aias, for
the man fell close by him. Swiftly he cast at the other, as he
departed, with his shining spear. And Polydamas himself avoided black
Fate, starting to one side, but Archelochos, son of Antenor, received
the spear, for the gods had willed his death. Him the spear struck at
the meeting of the head and neck, on the last joint of the spine, and
cut in twain both the tendons. And his head, and mouth, and nose, as he
fell, reached the earth long before his legs and knees, and Aias again
shouted to noble Polydamas: “Consider, Polydamas, and tell me truly,
whether thou sayst not that this man is worth slaying in place of
Prothoenor: he seems to me no coward, nor born of cowards, but a
brother of horse-taming Antenor, or a child, for he most closely
favoureth his house.”

So he spake, knowing the truth right well, and sorrow seized the hearts
of the Trojans. Then Akamas wounded Promachos the Boiotian with his
spear, from where he stood above his brother, that Promachos was
dragging away by the feet. Over him Akamas boasted terribly, shouting
aloud: “Ye Argive bowmen, insatiate of threats, verily not for us alone
shall there be struggle and toil, nay, but even as we shall ye likewise
perish. Consider how your Promachos sleepeth, vanquished by my spear,
that my brother’s blood-price may not be long unpaid. Even for this it
is that a man may well pray to leave some kinsman in his halls, that
will avenge his fall.”

So he spake, and sorrow came on the Argives at his boast. And chiefly
he stirred the heart of the wise Peneleos, who made for Akamas, and
Akamas abode not the onset of the prince Peneleos. But Peneleos wounded
Ilioneus, the son of Phorbas, rich in herds, that Hermes loved most
dearly of all the Trojans, and gave him wealth. Now his mother bare
Ilioneus, an only child, to Phorbas. Him did Peneleos wound beneath the
brows, at the bases of the eye, and drave out the eyeball, and the
spear went clean through the eye and through the nape of the neck, and
he fell back, stretching out both his hands. And Peneleos, drawing
forth his sharp sword, smote him on the middle of the neck, and smote
off even to the ground the head with the helmet, and still the strong
spear stood in the eye, and lifting it up like a poppy head, he showed
it to the Trojans, and spoke his boastful words: “Ye Trojans, I pray
you bid the dear father and the mother of proud Ilioneus to wail in
their halls, for neither will the wife of Promachos, son of Alegenor,
rejoice in her dear husband’s coming, in that hour when we youths of
the Achaians return with our ships out of Troy-land.”

So he spake, and fear fell on the limbs of all of them; and each man
looked about to see where he might flee sheer destruction.

Tell me now, ye Muses, that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who was
the first of the Achaians to lift the bloody spoils, when once the
renowned Shaker of the earth turned the battle.

Verily it was Aias, son of Telamon, that first wounded Hyrtios, the son
of Gyrtias, the leader of the Mysians strong of heart, and Antilochos
stripped the spoils from Phalkes and Mermeros, and Meriones slew Morys
and Hippotion, and Teukros slew Prothoon and Periphetes, and next
Atreus’ son wounded in the flank Hyperenor, the shepherd of the host,
and the bronze point tore through and let out the entrails, and the
soul through the stricken wound fled hastily, and darkness covered his
eyes. But most men did Aias slay, the swift-footed son of Oileus, for
there was none so speedy of foot as he, to follow when men fled, when
Zeus sent terror among them.




BOOK XV.


Zeus awakening, biddeth Apollo revive Hector, and restore the fortunes
of the Trojans. Fire is thrown on the ship of Protesilaos.


Now when they had sped in flight across the palisade and trench, and
many were overcome at the hands of the Danaans, the rest were stayed,
and abode beside the chariots in confusion, and pale with terror, and
Zeus awoke, on the peaks of Ida, beside Hera of the golden throne. Then
he leaped up, and stood, and beheld the Trojans and Achaians, those in
flight, and these driving them on from the rear, even the Argives, and
among them the prince Poseidon. And Hector he saw lying on the plain,
and around him sat his comrades, and he was gasping with difficult
breath, and his mind wandering, and was vomiting blood, for it was not
the weakest of the Achaians that had smitten him. Beholding him, the
father of men and gods had pity on him, and terribly he spoke to Hera,
with fierce look: “O thou ill to deal with, Hera, verily it is thy
crafty wile that has made noble Hector cease from the fight, and has
terrified the host. Nay, but yet I know not whether thou mayst not be
the first to reap the fruits of thy cruel treason, and I beat thee with
stripes. Dost thou not remember, when thou wert hung from on high, and
from thy feet I suspended two anvils,* and round thy hands fastened a
golden bond that might not be broken? And thou didst hang in the clear
air and the clouds, and the gods were wroth in high Olympus, but they
could not come round and unloose thee.” Nay, whomsoever I might take, I
would clutch, and throw from the threshold, to come fainting to the
earth, yd verily not even so did the ceaseless sorrow leave my soul
free: sorrow for godlike Herakles. Him didst thou drive, when thou
hadst suborned the tempest, with the help of the North Wind, over the
unvintaged deep, out of thine evil counsel, and then didst carry him
away to well-peopled Kos. Him did I rescue thence, and lead again to
Argos, the pastureland of horses, after his much labour. Of these
things will I mind thee again, that thou mayst cease from thy wiles,
that thou mayst know if it profit thee at all, the dalliance and the
love, wherein thou didst lie with me, when thou hadst come from among
the gods, and didst beguile me.”

* Or, “thunderbolts”; _i.e._ meteoric stones.


So spake he, and the ox-eyed lady Hera shuddered, and spake unto him
winged words, saying: “Let earth now be witness hereto, and wide heaven
above, and that falling water of Styx, the greatest oath and the most
terrible to the blessed gods, and thine own sacred head, and our own
bridal bed, whereby never would I forswear myself, that not by my will
does earth-shaking Poseidon trouble the Trojans and Hector, and succour
them of the other part. Nay, it is his own soul that urgeth and
commandeth him, and he had pity on the Achaians, when he beheld them
hard pressed beside the ships. I would even counsel him also to go even
where thou, lord of the storm-cloud, mayst lead him.”

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and answering her
he spake winged words: “If thou, of a truth, O ox-eyed lady Hera,
wouldst hereafter abide of one mind with me among the immortal gods,
thereon would Poseidon, howsoever much his wish be contrariwise,
quickly turn his mind otherwhere, after thy heart and mine. But if
indeed thou speakest the truth and soothly, go thou now among the
tribes of the gods, and call Iris to come hither, and Apollo, the
renowned archer, that Iris may go among the host of mail-clad Achaians
and tell Poseidon the prince to cease from the war, and get him unto
his own house. But let Phoebus Apollo spur Hector on to the war, and
breathe strength into him again, and make him forget his anguish, that
now wears down his heart, and drive the Achaians back again, when he
hath stirred in them craven fear. Let them flee and fall among the
many-benched ships of Achilles son of Peleus, and he shall rouse his
own comrade, Patroklos; and him shall renowned Hector slay with the
spear, in front of Ilios, after that he has slain many other youths,
and among them my son, noble Sarpedon. In wrath therefor shall goodly
Achilles slay Hector. From that hour verily will I cause a new pursuit
from the ships, that shall endure continually, even until the Achaians
take steep Ilios, through the counsels of Athene. But before that hour
neither do I cease in my wrath, nor will I suffer any other of the
Immortals to help the Danaans there, before I accomplish that desire of
the son of Peleus, as I promised him at the first, and confirmed the
same with a nod of my head, on that day when the goddess Thetis clasped
my knees, imploring me to honour Achilles, the sacker of cities.”

So spake he, nor did the white-armed goddess Hera disobey him, and she
sped down from the hills of Ida to high Olympus. And even as when the
mind of a man darts speedily, of one that hath travelled over far
lands, and considers in his wise heart, “Would that I were here or
there,” and he thinketh him of many things, so swiftly fled she in her
eagerness, the lady Hera, and came to steep Olympus, and went among the
gathering of the immortal gods in the house of Zeus, and when they
beheld her they all rose up together, and held out their cups to her in
welcome. The others she left alone, but took the cup of Themis of the
fair cheeks, for she was the first that came running to meet her, and
speaking winged words accosted her: “Hera, wherefore hast thou come?
thou seemest like one confounded; verily the son of Kronos hath made
thee adread, thine own husband.”

Then the white-armed goddess Hera answered her, saying: “Ask me not
concerning this, O goddess Themis; thyself knowest it, how overweening
is his heart, and unyielding. But do thou begin the equal banquet of
the gods in the halls, and thus shalt thou hear among all the
Immortals, even what evil deeds Zeus declareth. Nay, methinks, not
equally will it delight the minds of all, neither of gods nor mortals,
if even now any still sit with pleasure at the feast.”

So spake the lady Hera, and sat her down, while the gods were heavy at
heart in the hall of Zeus. And she laughed with her lips, but her
forehead above her dark brows was not gladdened, and indignantly she
spake among them all: “Witless that we are to be wroth in our folly
against Zeus! Even still we are eager to draw nigh to him, and let him
from his will, by word or deed, but he sits apart and careth not, nor
takes any thought thereof, for he deems that among the immortal gods he
is manifestly pre-eminent in force and might. Wherefore do ye content
yourselves with whatsoever sorrow he sends on each of you. Already,
methinks, has sorrow been wrought for Ares, for his son has fallen in
the fight, even the dearest of men, Askalaphos, that dread Ares deemeth
to be verily his own.”

So spake she, but Ares smote his strong thighs with his hands
flatlings, and sorrowing he spake: “Hold me not now to blame, ye that
keep the mansions of Olympus, if I avenge the slaying of my son, and go
to the ships of the Achaians, even if it be my doom to be smitten with
the bolt of Zeus, and lie among the dead, in the dust and blood.”

So spake he, and bade yoke his horses, Fear and Dread, and himself did
on his shining harness. Thereby would yet a greater and more implacable
wrath and anger have been caused between Zeus and the Immortals, had
not Athene, in terror for the sake of all the gods, leaped out through
the doorway, and left the throne wherein she sat, and taken from Ares’
head the helmet, and the shield from his shoulders, and drawn the spear
of bronze from his stalwart hand, and set it apart, and then with words
she rebuked the impetuous Ares: “Mad that thou art, and distraught of
wit—this is thy bane! Verily thou hast ears and hearest not, and
perished have thine understanding and thine awe. Hearest thou not what
she saith, the white-armed goddess Hera, that even now is come from
Olympian Zeus? Dost thou wish both thyself to fill up the measure of
mischief and so return to Olympus ruefully, of necessity, and for all
the other gods to sow the seed of a great wrong? For straightway will
he leave the high-hearted Trojans and the Achaians, and to us will he
come to make tumult in Olympus: and he will clutch us each in turn, the
blameless with the guilty. Wherefore now again I bid thee to abate
thine anger for thy son, for already many a man stronger than he, and
more hardy of his hands, has fallen, or yet will fall; and a hard thing
it is to save the lineage and offspring of all men.”

So spake she, and made impetuous Ares sit down on his throne. But Hera
called Apollo without the hall and Iris, that is the messenger of the
immortal gods, and she spake winged words, and addressed them, saying:
“Zeus bids you go to Ida as swiftly as may be, and when ye have gone,
and looked on the face of Zeus, do ye whatsoever he shall order and
command.”

So spake she, and returned again, the lady Hera, and sat down on her
throne, and they flew forward speedily, and came to many-fountained
Ida, mother of wild beasts, and found far-seeing Zeus seated on topmost
Gargaros, and round him a fragrant cloud was circled like a crown. And
these twain came before the face of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, and stood
there, and he was no wise displeased at heart when he beheld them, for
that speedily they had obeyed the words of his dear wife. And to Iris
first he spake winged words: “Go, get thee, swift Iris, to the prince
Poseidon, and tell him all these things, nor be a false messenger.
Command him to cease from war and battle, and to go among the tribes of
the gods, or into the bright sea. But if he will not obey my words, but
will hold me in no regard, then let him consider in his heart and mind,
lest he dare not for all his strength to abide me when I come against
him, since I deem me to be far mightier than he, and elder born. But
this his heart feareth not,—to call himself the peer of me whom even
the other gods do hold in dread.”

So spake he, nor did the wind-footed fleet Iris disobey him, but went
down the hills of Ida to sacred Ilios. And as when snow or chill hail
fleets from the clouds beneath the stress of the North Wind born in the
clear air, so fleetly she fled in her eagerness, swift Iris, and drew
near the renowned Earth-shaker and spake to him, saying: “A certain
message to thee, O dark-haired embracer of the earth, have I come
hither to bring from aegis-bearing Zeus. He biddeth thee cease from the
battle and war, and go among the tribes of the gods, or into the bright
sea. And if thou wilt not obey his word, but wilt hold him in no
regard, he threatens that even himself will come hither against thee in
battle, and he biddeth thee avoid thee out of his hands since he
deemeth him far mightier than thou, and elder born, but thy heart
feareth not to call thyself the peer of him whom even the other gods do
hold in dread.”

Then, in great displeasure the renowned Shaker of the earth answered
her: “Out on it, verily now, for as strong as he is, he hath spoken
over-haughtily, if indeed he will subdue by force, against my will, me
that am his equal in honour. For three brethren are we, and sons of
Kronos, whom Rhea bare, Zeus, and myself, and Hades is the third, the
ruler of the folk in the under-world. And in three lots are all things
divided, and each drew a domain of his own, and to me fell the hoary
sea, to be my habitation for ever, when we shook the lots: and Hades
drew the murky darkness, and Zeus the wide heaven, in clear air and
clouds, but the earth and high Olympus are yet common to all. Wherefore
no whit will I walk after the will of Zeus, but quietly let him abide,
for all his strength, in his third portion. And with the might of his
hands let him not strive to terrify me withal, as if I were a coward.
Better for him were it to threaten with terrible words his daughters
and his sons, that himself begat, who will perforce listen to whatso he
enjoins.”

Then the fleet wind-footed Iris answered him: “Is it indeed thy will, O
dark-haired embracer of the earth, that even thus I shall carry to Zeus
this message, hard and froward, or wilt thou turn thee at all, for the
hearts of the good may be turned? Thou knowest how the Erinyes do
always follow to aid the elder-born.”

Then he answered her again, Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth: “Goddess
Iris, most duly hast thou spoken this word. Yea, an excellent thing is
this, when the bearer of a message has a prudent wit. Yet this is a
terrible grief that cometh on heart and spirit, whenso any desireth to
upbraid with angry words his peer to whom fate hath assigned an equal
share with himself. But verily now will I yield, for all mine anger;
but another thing will I tell thee, and make this threat in my heart,
that if against my will, and the will of Athene, the driver of the
prey, and of Hera and Hermes, and prince Hephaistos, Zeus shall spare
steep Ilios, nor choose utterly to destroy it, and give great might to
the Argives, let him know this, that our wrath will be inappeasable.”

So spake the Shaker of the earth, and left the host of the Achaians,
and passed to the sea, and sank, and sorely they missed him, the heroes
of the Achaians.

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, spake to Apollo, saying: “Go
now, dear Phoebus, to Hector of the helm of bronze, for, lo, already
the embracer of the world, the Earthshaker, is gone to the bright sea,
shunning our utter wrath, ay, and had he not done so, even the others
would have heard of our strife, even the gods of the nether world, that
are with Kronos. But better far is this, both for me, and for him,
that, despite his wrath, he should yield to my hands, for not without
sweat would this strife have been accomplished. But do thou take in thy
hands the tasselled aegis, and shake it fiercely and affright the
Achaian heroes. But, thou Archer-God, let glorious Hector be thy care,
and rouse in him great wrath even till the Achaians come in their
flight to the ships, and the Hellespont. And from that moment will I
devise word and deed wherewithal the Achaians may take breath again
from their toil.”

So spake he, nor was Apollo deaf to the word of the Father, but he went
down the hills of Ida like a fleet falcon, the bane of doves, that is
the swiftest of flying things. And he found the son of wise-hearted
Priam, noble Hector, sitting up, no longer lying, for he had but late
got back his life, and knew the comrades around him, and his gasping
and his sweat had ceased, from the moment when the will of
aegis-bearing Zeus began to revive him. Then far-darting Apollo stood
near him, and spake to him: “Hector, son of Priam, why dost thou sit
fainting apart from the others? Is it perchance that some trouble
cometh upon thee?”

Then, with faint breath answered him Hector of the glancing helm: “Nay,
but who art thou, best of the gods, who enquirest of me face to face?
Dost thou not know that by the hindmost row of the ships of the
Achaians, Aias of the loud war-cry smote me on the breast with a stone,
as I was slaying his comrades, and made me cease from mine impetuous
might? And verily I deemed that this very day I should pass to the
dead, and the house of Hades, when I had gasped my life away.”

Then prince Apollo the Far-darter answered him again: “Take courage
now, so great an ally hath the son of Kronos sent thee out of Ida, to
stand by thee and defend thee, even Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword,
me who of old defend thee, thyself and the steep citadel. But come now
bid thy many charioteers drive their swift steeds against the hollow
ships, and I will go before and make smooth all the way for the
chariots, and will put to flight the Achaian heroes.”

So he spake, and breathed great might into the shepherd of the host,
and even as when a stalled horse, full fed at the manger, breaks his
tether and speedeth at the gallop over the plain exultingly, being wont
to bathe in the fair-flowing stream, and holds his head on high, and
the mane floweth about his shoulders, and he trusteth in his glory, and
nimbly his knees bear him to the haunts and pasture of the mares, even
so Hector lightly moved his feet and knees, urging on his horsemen,
when he heard the voice of the god. But as when hounds and country folk
pursue a horned stag, or a wild goat, that steep rock and shady wood
save from them, nor is it their lot to find him, but at their clamour a
bearded lion hath shown himself on the way, and lightly turned them all
despite their eagerness, even so the Danaans for a while followed on
always in their companies, smiting with swords and double-pointed
spears, but when they saw Hector going up and down the ranks of men,
then were they afraid, and the hearts of all fell to their feet.

Then to them spake Thoas, son of Andraimon, far the best of the
Aitolians, skilled in throwing the dart, and good in close fight, and
in council did few of the Achaians surpass him, when the young men were
striving in debate; with good intent he made harangue and spake among
them: “Alas, and verily a great marvel is this I behold with mine eyes,
how he hath again arisen, and hath avoided the Fates, even Hector.
Surely each of us hoped in his heart, that he had died beneath the hand
of Aias, son of Telamon. But some one of the gods again hath delivered
and saved Hector, who verily hath loosened the knees of many of the
Danaans, as methinks will befall even now, for not without the will of
loud-thundering Zeus doth he rise in the front ranks, thus eager for
battle. But come, as I declare let us all obey. Let us bid the throng
turn back to the ships, but let us as many as avow us to be the best in
the host, take our stand, if perchance first we may meet him, and hold
him off with outstretched spears, and he, methinks, for all his
eagerness, will fear at heart to enter into the press of the Danaans.”

So spake he, and they heard him eagerly, and obeyed him. They that were
with Aias and the prince Idomeneus, and Teukros, and Meriones, and
Meges the peer of Ares, called to all the best of the warriors and
sustained the fight with Hector and the Trojans, but behind them the
multitude returned to the ships of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans drave forward in close ranks, and with long strides
Hector led them, while in front of him went Phoebus Apollo, his
shoulders wrapped in cloud, and still he held the fell aegis, dread,
circled with a shaggy fringe, and gleaming, that Hephaistos the smith
gave to Zeus, to bear for the terror of men; with this in his hands did
he lead the host.

Now the Argives abode them in close ranks, and shrill the cry arose on
both sides, and the arrows leaped from the bow-strings, and many spears
from stalwart hands, whereof some stood fast in the flesh of young men
swift in fight, but many halfway, ere ever they reached the white
flesh, stuck in the ground, longing to glut themselves with flesh. Now
so long as Phoebus Apollo held the aegis unmoved in his hands, so long
the darts smote either side amain, and the folk fell. But when he
looked face to face on the Danaans of the swift steeds, and shook the
aegis, and himself shouted mightily, he quelled their heart in their
breast, and they forgot their impetuous valour. And as when two wild
beasts drive in confusion a herd of kine, or a great flock of sheep, in
the dark hour of black night, coming swiftly on them when the herdsman
is not by, even so were the Achaians terror-stricken and strengthless,
for Apollo sent a panic among them, but still gave renown to the
Trojans and Hector.

Then man fell upon man, when the close fight was scattered. Hector slew
Stichios, and Arkesilaos, one a leader of the mail-clad Boiotians, the
other the true comrade of great-hearted Menestheus. And Aineias slew
Medon and Iasos, whereof one was the bastard son of divine Oileus, even
Medon, brother of Aias, but he dwelt in Phylake, far from his own
country, for that he had slain a man the brother of his stepmother
Eriopis, the wife of Oileus. But Iasos was a leader of the Athenians,
and was called the son of Sphelos, the son of Boukolos. And Polydamas
slew Mekisteus, and Polites Echios in the forefront of the battle, and
noble Agenor overcame Klonios. And Deïochos as he was flying among the
fighters in the foremost rank Paris smote behind the lower part of the
shoulder, and drave the bronze clean through.

Now while they were stripping the spoil from these, even then the
Achaians were dashing into the delved fosse, and against the palisade,
fleeing hither and thither in their terror, and were driven perforce
within the wall, but Hector called with a loud shout to the Trojans:
“Make ye against the ships, and leave the bloody spoils. Whomsoever I
shall see apart from the ships on the other side, his death will I
there devise, nor forthwith shall his kinsmen and kinswomen lay him
dead on the funeral fire, but dogs shall tear him in front of our
citadel.”

So speaking he smote his horses on the shoulder with the lash, and
called aloud on the Trojans along the ranks. And they all cried out,
and level with his held the steeds that drew their chariots, with a
marvellous din, and in front of them Phoebus Apollo lightly dashed down
with his feet the banks of the deep ditch, and cast them into the midst
thereof, making a bridgeway long and wide as is a spear-cast, when a
man throws to make trial of his strength. Thereby the Trojans poured
forward in their battalions, while in their van Apollo held the
splendid aegis. And most easily did he cast down the wall of the
Achaians, as when a boy scatters the sand beside the sea, first making
sand buildings for sport in his childishness, and then again, in his
sport, confounding them with his feet and hands; even so didst thou,
archer Apollo, confound the long toil and labour of the Argives, and
among them rouse a panic fear.

So they were halting, and abiding by the ships, calling each to other;
and lifting their hands to all the gods did each man pray vehemently,
and chiefly prayed Gerenian Nestor, the Warden of the Achaians,
stretching his hand towards the starry heaven: “O father Zeus, if ever
any one of us in wheat-bearing Argos did burn to thee fat thighs of
bull or sheep, and prayed that he might return, and thou didst promise
and assent thereto, of these things be thou mindful, and avert,
Olympian, the pitiless day, nor suffer the Trojans thus to overcome the
Achaians.”

So spake he in his prayer, and Zeus, the Lord of counsel, thundered
loudly, hearing the prayers of the ancient son of Neleus.

But the Trojans when they heard the thunder of aegis-bearing Zeus,
rushed yet the more eagerly upon the Argives, and were mindful of the
joy of battle. And as when a great wave of the wide sea sweeps over the
bulwarks of a ship, the might of the wind constraining it, which
chiefly swells the waves, even so did the Trojans with a great cry
bound over the wall, and drave their horses on, and at the hindmost row
of the ships were fighting hand to hand with double-pointed spears, the
Trojans from the chariots, but the Achaians climbing up aloft, from the
black ships with long pikes that they had lying in the ships for battle
at sea, jointed pikes shod at the head with bronze.

Now Patroklos, as long as the Achaians and Trojans were fighting about
the wall, without the swift ships, sat in the hut of kindly Eurypylos,
and was making him glad with talk, and on his cruel wound was laying
herbs, to medicine his dark pain. But when he perceived the Trojans
rushing over the wall, and the din and flight of the Danaans began,
then did he groan, and smote his two thighs with his hands flatlings,
and sorrowing he spake: “Eurypylos, no longer at all may I abide with
thee here, though great thy need, for verily a great strife has arisen.
But thee let thy squire comfort, while I hasten to Achilles, that I may
urge him to join the battle. Who knows but with god’s help I may arouse
his spirit with my persuasion? and a good thing is the persuasion of a
friend.”

Even as he spake, his feet were bearing him away, but the Achaians abode the
onset of the Trojans steadfastly, yet availed not to drive them, though fewer
they were, from the ships: neither at all could the Trojans break the ranks of
the Danaans and pour among the huts and the ships. But even as the carpenter’s
line doth straighten the timber of a ship, in the hands of a cunning shipwright
that is well skilled in all craft, by the inspiration of Athene, so equally was
strained their war and battle, and divers of them were fighting about divers
ships. Now Hector made for renowned Aias, and they twain were warring about the
same ship, nor could the one drive back the other and set fire to the ship, nor
could the other thrust him away, since the god urged him on. There did glorious
Aias smite Kaletor son of Klytios in the breast with a spear, as he was
carrying fire against the ship, and he fell with a crash, and the torch dropped
from his hand. But Hector, when he beheld with his eyes his cousin fallen in
the dust, in front of the black ship, called with a loud cry to the Trojans and
Lykians: “Ye Trojans, and Lykians, and Dardanians that fight hand to hand,
slacken not at all from the battle in this strait, but save the son of Klytios;
lest the Achaians spoil him of his harness, now that he hath fallen in the
precinct of the ships.”

So spake he, and hurled at Aias with a shining spear and Aias he
missed, but Lykophron, the son of Mastor, the Kytherian squire of Aias,
who dwelt with him, having slain a man in divine Kythera, him Hector
smote on the head above the ear with the sharp bronze, even as he stood
near Aias; and backward in the dust he fell to earth from the stern of
the ship, and his limbs were loosened. And Aias shuddered, and spake to
his brother: “Dear Teukros, lo our true comrade hath been slain, even
the son of Mastor out of Kythera whom we honoured at home in the halls
like our own parents. Him hath great-hearted Hector slain. Where now
are thy swift shafts of doom, and the bow that Phoebus Apollo gave
thee?”

So spake he, and the other marked him, and ran, and came and stood
close by him, with the bended bow in his hand, and the quiver with the
arrows, and right swiftly he showered his shafts upon the Trojans. And
he smote Kleitos, the splendid son of Peisenor, the comrade of
Polydamas, the haughty son of Panthoos, with the reins in his hand, as
he was busy with the horses, for thither was he driving them where far
the most of the companies were broken in confusion, and he was showing
a favour to Hector and the Trojans. But swiftly on himself came his
bane, that not one of them could ward off from him, despite their
desire. For the woful arrow lighted on the back of his neck, and he
fell from the chariot, and back started his horses, shaking the empty
car. But straightway the prince Polydamas beheld it, and was the first
to come over against the horses. Them he gave to Astynoos, the son of
Protiaon, and enjoined him straitly to hold the horses close at hand,
and look on, and himself went back, and mingled with the foremost
fighters. Then Teukros aimed another shaft against Hector of the helm
of bronze, and would have made cease the battle by the ships of the
Achaians, if he had smitten him in his prowess and taken his life away.
But he escaped not the wise mind of Zeus, who guarded Hector, but took
away the praise from Teukros son of Telamon, for he brake the
well-twisted string on the goodly bow, even as Teukros was aiming at
Hector, and his arrow weighted with bronze wandered otherwhere, and the
bow fell from his hands. But Teukros shuddered, and spake to his
brother saying: “Alas, now verily the god breaks altogether the purpose
of our battle, in that he hath cast the bow from my hand, and hath
broken the newly twisted cord, which I bound on but this morning, that
it might sustain the many shafts that should leap from the bow.”

Then the great Aias son of Telamon answered him saying: “Yea, friend,
but let the bow and the many arrows lie, even so, since the god has
confounded them, being jealous of the Danaans, but take in thy hands a
long spear, and a shield on thy shoulder, and war with the Trojans, and
arouse the rest of the host. Verily not without labour, for all their
victory, let them take the well-timbered ships, nay, let us be mindful
of the delight of battle.”

So spake he, and Teukros set the bow within the huts again, but round
his shoulder he set a fourfold shield, and on his mighty head a
well-wrought helmet, [with a horse-hair plume, and terribly the crest
nodded above.] And he seized a strong spear, shod with sharp bronze,
and started on his way, and started and running right speedily stood
beside Aias.

But when Hector saw the artillery of Teukros harmed, he cried, with a
mighty shout, to the Trojans and Lykians: “Trojans, and Lykians, and
Dardanians that love close fight, play the man, my friends, and be
mindful of impetuous valour, here by the hollow ships, for I have seen
with mine eyes, how the artillery of the bravest warrior was harmed by
Zeus. And most easily discerned is the aid of Zeus to men both to
whomso he gives the meed of the greater honour and whom he would minish
and hath no will to aid, as even now he minisheth the strength of the
Argives, but us he aideth. But fight in your firm companies at the
ships, and whosoever of you be smitten by dart or blow and meeteth
death and fate, so let him die. Lo, it is no dishonourable thing for
him to fall fighting for his country, but his wife and his children
after him are safe, and his house unharmed, and his lot of land, if but
the Achaians fare with their ships to their dear native land.”

So spake he and aroused the might and the spirit of every man.

But Aias again, on the other side, called unto his comrades: “Shame on
you, Argives: now is one thing sure, either that we must perish
utterly, or be saved and drive the peril from the ships. Think ye that
if Hector of the glancing helm take the ships, ye will come by dry land
each to his own country? Hear ye not Hector exhorting all the host, so
eager, verily, is he to burn the ships? Truly he bids not men to the
dance but to battle. And for us there is no better counsel nor device,
but to put forth our hands and all our might in close combat. Better it
were to risk life or death, once for all, than long to be straitened in
the dread stress of battle, thus vainly by the ships, at the hands of
worse men than we be.”

So spake he, and aroused the might and the spirit of every man. Then
Hector slew Schedios, the son of Perimedes, a leader of the Phokians,
while Aias slew Laodamas, the leader of the foot-men, the noble son of
Antenor, and Polydamas slew Otos, of Kyllene, comrade of Phyleides, a
chief of the high-hearted Epeians. And Meges, when he beheld it rushed
on him, but Polydamas stooped downwards, and him Meges missed,—for
Apollo suffered not the son of Panthoos to be smitten among the
foremost fighters,—but he wounded Kroismos in the midst of the breast
with his spear. And he fell with a crash, and the other set to
stripping the harness from his shoulders. Then Dolops rose against him,
a warrior skilled, Dolops son of Lampos, whom Lampos Laomedon’s son
begat, his bravest son, well skilled in impetuous valour; who then
smote the midst of the shield of Phyleus’ son, setting on him at close
quarters. But his well-wrought corslet guarded him, the corslet that he
wore, fashioned of plates of mail. This corslet did Phyleus once bear
out of Ephyre, from the river Selleëis. For a guest friend of his had
given him the same, even Euphetes, king of men, that he might bear it
in war, a defence against foemen; and now from his son’s flesh too it
warded off his bane. Now Meges smote with sharpened spear at the
topmost crest of his helmet of bronze with horse-hair plume, and brake
off his plume of horse-hair, and it all fell earthward in the dust,
shining with its new scarlet dye. Now while he abode, and fought, and
yet hoped for victory, there came against him to the rescue warlike
Menelaos, and stood unmarked on his flank with his spear, and smote him
on the shoulder from behind, and the eager spear rushed through his
breast, in forward flight, and then fell he forward. Then the twain
made for him to strip from his shoulders his harness of bronze. But
Hector called to all his kinsmen, and first he chid the son of
Hiketaon, the strong Melanippos. Now till then was Melanippos wont to
feed his kine of trailing gait in Perkote, far off from hostile men,
but when the curved ships of the Danaans came, he returned to Ilios,
and excelled among the Trojans, and dwelt hard by Priam, who honoured
him equally with his own children. Him did Hector chide, and spake out,
and called him by name: “Melanippos, are we to be thus slack? Is thy
heart not moved at all, at sight of thy kinsman slain? Seest thou not
how they are busied about the harness of Dolops? nay, follow on, for no
longer may we fight with the Argives from afar, till either we slay
them, or they utterly take steep Ilios, and slay her people.”

So spake he, and led on, while the other followed him, a godlike man.
But the great Aias, son of Telamon, exhorted the Argives, saying: “O
friends, play the man, and take shame in your hearts; yea, have shame
each of the other’s contempt, in the strong battle. For of men thus
shamefast more escape than fall, but of men that flee cometh neither
glory, nor any avail.”

So spake he, and they likewise themselves were eager to drive off the
others, and laid up his word in their hearts, and begirt the ships with
a ring of bronze, while Zeus urged on the Trojans. Then Menelaos of the
loud war-cry exhorted Antilochos, “Antilochos, not one of the Achaians
is younger than thou, nor swifter of foot, nor strong as art thou in
fight; see now if thou canst leap out, and smite some man of the
Trojans.”

So spake he, and hasted back again, having heartened the other, and
forth Antilochos leaped from the foremost ranks, and cast his shining
spear, glancing all around him, and the Trojans gave ground before him
when he threw. And no vain dart threw he, but smote Melanippos, the
proud son of Hiketaon, as he was returning to the combat; on the breast
hard by the nipple he smote him. And he fell with a crash, and darkness
covered his eyes. And Antilochos set on like a hound that rushes upon a
wounded fawn, that the hunter hath aimed at and smitten as it leaped
from its lair, and hath loosened all its limbs. Even so upon thee,
Melanippos, leaped Antilochos steadfast in battle, to spoil thy
harness. But noble Hector marked him, and came running against him
through the battle. But Antilochos abode not his onset, swift warrior
though he was, but he fled, like a wild beast that hath done some evil
thing, having slain a dog, or a herdsman by the kine, and flees, before
the press of men can gather; even so fled the son of Nestor. Now the
Trojans and Hector, with wonderful clamour, showered upon him their
dolorous darts, but he turned, and stood, when he had reached the host
of his comrades.

Now the Trojans, like ravening lions, rushed upon the ships, fulfilling
the behests of Zeus, that ever was rousing their great wrath, but
softened the temper of the Argives, and took away their glory, while he
spurred on the others. For the heart of Zeus was set on giving glory to
Hector, the son of Priam, that withal he might cast fierce-blazing
fire, unwearied, upon the beaked ships, and so fulfil all the
presumptuous prayer of Thetis; wherefore wise-counselling Zeus awaited,
till his eyes should see the glare of a burning ship. For even from
that hour was he to ordain the backward chase of the Trojans from the
ships, and to give glory to the Danaans. With this design was he
rousing Hector, Priam’s son, that himself was right eager, against the
hollow ships. And he was raging, like Ares, the brandisher of the
spear, or as when ruinous fire rages on the hills, in the folds of a
deep woodland; and foam grew about his mouth, and his eyes shone
beneath his dreadful brows, and around the temples of Hector as he
fought his helm shook terribly. For Zeus out of heaven was his ally,
and gave him honour and renown, he being but one man against so many.
For short of life was he to be, yea, and already Pallas Athene was
urging against him the day of destiny, at the hand of the son of
Peleus. And fain he was to break the ranks of men, trying them
wheresoever he saw the thickest press, and the goodliest harness. Yet
not even so might he break them for all his eagerness. Nay, they stood
firm, and embattled like a steep rock and a great, hard by the hoary
sea, a rock that abides the swift paths of the shrill winds, and the
swelling waves that roar against it. Even so the Danaans steadfastly
abode the Trojans and fled not away. But Hector shining with fire on
all sides leaped on the throng, and fell upon them, as when beneath the
storm-clouds a fleet wave reared of the winds falls on a swift ship,
and she is all hidden with foam, and the dread blast of the wind roars
against the sail, and the sailors fear, and tremble in their hearts,
for by but a little way are they borne forth from death, even so the
spirit was torn in the breasts of the Achaians. But he came on like a
ravening lion making against the kine, that are feeding innumerable in
the low-lying land of a great marsh, and among them is a herdsman that
as yet knoweth not well how to fight with a wild beast concerning the
slaughter of the kine of crooked horn, and ever he paces abreast with
the rear or the van of the cattle, but the lion leaps into the midst,
and devours a cow, and they all tremble for fear, even so the Achaians
all were made terribly adread by Hector and father Zeus. But Hector
slew Periphetes of Mykene only, the dear son of Kopreus, that was wont
to go on the errands of Eurystheus, to the mighty Herakles. From him, a
far baser father, was born a better son, in all manner of excellence,
in fleetness of foot, and in war, and of mind he was wise among the
first of the Mykenaeans. He thus then yielded Hector the greater glory.
For as he turned back, he tripped against the rim of his shield which
he was wont to bear, a shield that reached to the feet, a fence against
javelins—thereon he stumbled, and fell back, and his helm rang
wrondrously around his temples as he fell. And Hector quickly spied it,
and ran up swiftly and stood by him, and fixed a spear in his breast,
and slew him hard by his dear comrades that could not aid him, despite
all their sorrow for their friend, for themselves greatly dreaded noble
Hector.

Now were they come between the ships, and the prows protected them, the
prows of the ships drawn up in the first line, but the Trojans rushed
in after them. And the Argives were compelled even of necessity to give
back from the foremost ships, yet there they abode in close rank beside
the huts, and did not scatter throughout the camp. For shame and fear
restrained them and ceaselessly they kept shouting each to other. Now
Gerenian Nestor above all, the Warden of the Achaians, implored each
man by the memory of them that begat him, and spake beseechingly: “O
friends, play the man, and set shame of other men’s contempt in hearts.
Let each also be mindful of children and wives, and of his possessions,
and of them that begat him, whether any have parents yet alive or they
be already dead. For their sake do I here beseech you, for the sake of
them that are not with us, to stand stoutly, nor turn to flight.”

So spake he, and roused each man’s courage and might, and from their
eyes Athene lifted the wondrous cloud of mist, and light came mightily
upon them from either side, both from the side of the ships, and from
the quarter of even-balanced war. And they beheld Hector of the loud
war-cry, and his comrades, both them that stood in the rear and were
not fighting, and all them that fought in the battle by the swift
ships.

Nor yet did it please the spirit of high-hearted Aias, to stand in the
place whereto the other sons of the Achaians had withdrawn, but he kept
faring with long strides, up and down the decks of the ships, and he
wielded in his hands a great pike for sea-battles, jointed with rings,
two and twenty cubits in length. And even as a man right well skilled
in horsemanship that couples four horses out of many, and hurrying them
from the plain towards a great city, drives along the public way, many
men and women marvelling on him, and firmly ever he leaps, and changes
his stand from horse to horse, while they fly along, even so Aias went
with long strides, over many a deck of the swift ships, and his voice
went up unto heaven. And always with terrible cries he summoned the
Danaans to defend the ships and the huts. Nor did Hector abide in the
throng of well-armed Trojans, but even as a tawny eagle rushes on a
flock of winged fowl, that are feeding by a riverside, a flock of
geese, or cranes, or long-necked swans, even so Hector made straight
for a black-beaked ship, rushing right on it, and mightily Zeus urged
him on from behind with his strong hand, and roused on the host along
with him.

So again keen battle was set by the ships. Thou wouldst deem that
unwearied and unworn they met each other in war, so eagerly they
fought. And in their striving they were minded thus; the Achaians
verily deemed that never would they flee from the danger, but perish
there, but the heart of each Trojan hoped in his breast, that they
should fire the ships, and slay the heroes of the Achaians. With these
imaginations they stood to each other, and Hector seized the stern of a
seafaring ship, a fair ship, swift on the brine, that had borne
Protesilaos to Troia, but brought him not back again to his own
country. Now round his ship the Achaians and Trojans warred on each
other hand to hand, nor far apart did they endure the flights of
arrows, nor of darts, but standing hard each by other, with one heart,
with sharp axes and hatchets they fought, and with great swords, and
double-pointed spears. And many fair brands, dark-scabbarded and
hilted, fell to the ground, some from the hands, some from off the
shoulders of warring men, and the black earth ran with blood. But
Hector, after that once he had seized the ship’s stern, left not his
hold, keeping the ensign in his hands, and he called to the Trojans:
“Bring fire, and all with one voice do ye raise the war-cry; now hath
Zeus given us the dearest day of all,—to take the ships that came
hither against the will of the gods, and brought many woes upon us, by
the cowardice of the elders, who withheld me when I was eager to fight
at the sterns of the ships, and kept back the host. But if even then
far-seeing Zeus did harm our wits, now he himself doth urge and command
us onwards.”

So spake he, and they set yet the fiercer on the Argives. And Aias no
longer abode their onset, for he was driven back by the darts, but he
withdrew a little,—thinking that now he should die,—on to the oarsman’s
bench of seven feet long, and he left the decks of the trim ship. There
then he stood on the watch, and with his spear he ever drave the
Trojans from the ships, whosoever brought unwearied fire, and ever he
shouted terribly, calling to the Danaans: “O friends, Danaan heroes,
men of Ares’ company, play the man, my friends, and be mindful of
impetuous valour. Do we deem that there be allies at our backs, or some
wall stronger than this to ward off death from men? Verily there is not
hard by any city arrayed with towers, whereby we might defend
ourselves, having a host that could turn the balance of battle. Nay,
but we are set down in the plain of the mailed men of Troy, with our
backs against the sea, and far off from our own land. Therefore is
safety in battle, and not in slackening from the fight.”

So spake he, and rushed on ravening for battle, with his keen spear.
And whosoever of the Trojans was coming against the ship with blazing
fire, to pleasure Hector at his urging, him would Aias wound, awaiting
him with his long spear, and twelve men in front of the ships at close
quarters did he wound.




BOOK XVI.


How Patroklos fought in the armour of Achilles, and drove the Trojans
from the ships, but was slain at last by Hector.


So they were warring round the well-timbered ship, but Patroklos drew
near Achilles, shepherd of the host, and he shed warm tears, even as a
fountain of dark water that down a steep cliff pours its cloudy stream.
And noble swift-footed Achilles when he beheld him was grieved for his
sake, and accosted him, and spake winged words, saying: “Wherefore
weepest thou, Patroklos, like a fond little maid, that runs by her
mother’s side, and bids her mother take her up, snatching at her gown,
and hinders her in her going, and tearfully looks at her, till the
mother takes her up? like her, Patroklos, dost thou let fall soft
tears. Hast thou aught to tell to the Myrmidons, or to me myself, or is
it some tidings out of Phthia that thou alone hast beard? Or dost thou
lament for the sake of the Argives,—how they perish by the hollow ships
through their own transgression? Speak out, and hide it not within thy
spirit, that we may both know all.”

But with a heavy groan didst thou speak unto him, O knight Patroklos:
“O Achilles, son of Peleus, far the bravest of the Achaians, be not
wroth, seeing that so great calamity has beset the Achaians. For verily
all of them that aforetime were the best are lying among the ships,
smitten and wounded. Smitten is the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes, and
wounded is Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon; and smitten is
Eurypylos on the thigh with an arrow. And about them the leeches
skilled in medicines are busy, healing their wounds, but thou art hard
to reconcile, Achilles. Never then may such wrath take hold of me as
that thou nursest; thou brave to the hurting of others. What other men
later born shall have profit of thee, if thou dost not ward off base
ruin from the Argives? Pitiless that thou art, the knight Peleus was
not then thy father, nor Thetis thy mother, but the grey sea bare thee,
and the sheer cliffs, so untoward is thy spirit. But if in thy heart
thou art shunning some oracle, and thy lady mother hath told thee
somewhat from Zeus, yet me do thou send forth quickly, and make the
rest of the host of the Myrmidons follow me, if yet any light may arise
from me to the Danaans. And give me thy harness to buckle about my
shoulders, if perchance the Trojans may take me for thee, and so
abstain from battle, and the warlike sons of the Achaians may take
breath, wearied as they be, for brief is the breathing in war. And
lightly might we that are fresh drive men wearied with the battle back
to the citadel, away from the ships and the huts.”

So he spake and besought him, in his unwittingness, for truly it was to
be his own evil death and fate that he prayed for. Then to him in great
heaviness spake swift-footed Achilles: “Ah me, Patroklos of the seed of
Zeus, what word hast thou spoken? Neither take I heed of any oracle
that I wot of, nor yet has my lady mother told me somewhat from Zeus,
but this dread sorrow comes upon my heart and spirit, from the hour
that a man wishes to rob me who am his equal, and to take away my
prize, for that he excels me in power. A dread sorrow to me is this,
after all the toils that my heart hath endured. The maiden that the
sons of the Achaians chose out for me as my prize, and that I won with
my spear when I sacked a well-walled city, her has mighty Agamemnon the
son of Atreus taken back out of my hands, as though I were but some
sojourner dishonourable. But we will let bygones be bygones. No man may
be angry of heart for ever, yet verily I said that I would not cease
from my wrath, until that time when to mine own ships should come the
war-cry and the battle. But do thou on thy shoulders my famous harness,
and lead the war-loving Myrmidons to the fight, to ward off destruction
from the ships, lest they even burn the ships with blazing fire, and
take away our desired return. But when thou hast driven them from the
ships, return, and even if the loud-thundering lord of Hera grant thee
to win glory, yet long not thou apart from me to fight with the
war-loving Trojans; thereby wilt thou minish mine honour. Neither do
thou, exulting in war and strife, and slaying the Trojans, lead on
toward Ilios, lest one of the eternal gods from Olympus come against
thee; right dearly doth Apollo the Far-darter love them. Nay, return
back when thou halt brought safety to the ships, and suffer the rest to
fight along the plain. For would, O father Zeus, and Athene, and
Apollo, would that not one of all the Trojans might escape death, nor
one of the Argives, but that we twain might avoid destruction, that
alone we might undo the sacred coronal of Troy.”

So spake they each to other, but Aias no longer abode the onset, for he
was overpowered by darts; the counsel of Zeus was subduing him, and the
shafts of the proud Trojans; and his bright helmet, being smitten, kept
ringing terribly about his temples: for always it was smitten upon the
fair-wrought cheek-pieces. Moreover his left shoulder was wearied, as
steadfastly he held up his glittering shield, nor yet could they make
him give ground, as they pressed on with their darts around him. And
ever he was worn out with difficult breath, and much sweat kept running
from all his limbs, nor had he a moment to draw breath, so on all sides
was evil heaped on evil.

Tell me now, ye Muses that have mansions in Olympus, how first fire
fell on the ships of the Achaians. Hector drew near, and the ashen
spear of Aias he smote with his great sword, hard by the socket, behind
the point, and shore it clean away, and the son of Telamon brandished
in his hand no more than a pointless spear, and far from him the head
of bronze fell ringing on the ground.

And Aias knew in his noble heart, and shuddered at the deeds of the
gods, even how Zeus that thundereth on high did utterly cut off from
him avail in war, and desired victory for the Trojans. Then Aias gave
back out of the darts. But the Trojans cast on the swift ship
unwearying fire, and instantly the inextinguishable flame streamed over
her: so the fire begirt the stern, whereon Achilles smote his thighs,
and spake to Patroklos: “Arise, Patroklos of the seed of Zeus,
commander of the horsemen, for truly I see by the ships the rush of the
consuming fire. Up then, lest they take the ships, and there be no more
retreat; do on thy harness speedily, and I will summon the host.”

So spake he, while Patroklos was harnessing him in shining bronze. His
goodly greaves, fitted with silver clasps, he first girt round his
legs, and next did on around his breast the well-dight starry corslet
of the swift-footed son of Aiakos. And round his shoulders he cast a
sword of bronze, with studs of silver, and next took the great and
mighty shield, and on his proud head set a well-wrought helm with a
horse-hair crest, and terribly nodded the crest from above. Then seized
he two strong lances that fitted his grasp, only he took not the spear
of the noble son of Aiakos, heavy, and huge, and stalwart, that none
other of the Achaians could wield. And Patroklos bade Automedon to yoke
the horses speedily, even Automedon whom most he honoured after
Achilles, the breaker of the ranks of men, and whom he held trustiest
in battle to abide his call. And for him Automedon led beneath the yoke
the swift horses, Xanthos and Balios, that fly as swift as the winds,
the horses that the harpy Podarge bare to the West Wind, as she grazed
on the meadow by the stream of Okeanos. And in the side-traces he put
the goodly Pedasos, that Achilles carried away, when he took the city
of Eetion; and being but a mortal steed, he followed with the immortal
horses.

Meanwhile Achilles went and harnessed all the Myrmidons in the huts
with armour, and they gathered like ravening wolves with strength in
their hearts unspeakable. And among them all stood warlike Achilles
urging on the horses and the targeteers. And he aroused the heart and
valour of each of them, and the ranks were yet the closer serried when
they heard the prince. And as when a man builds the wall of a high
house with close-set stones, to avoid the might of the winds, even so
close were arrayed the helmets and bossy shields, and shield pressed on
shield, helm on helm, and man on man, and the horse-hair crests on the
bright helmet-ridges touched each other when they nodded, so close they
stood by each other.

And straightway they poured forth like wasps that have their dwelling
by the wayside, and that boys are ever wont to vex, always tormenting
them in their nests beside the way in childish sport, and a common evil
they make for many. With heart and spirit like theirs the Myrmidons
poured out now from the ships, and a cry arose unquenchable, and
Patroklos called on his comrades, shouting aloud: “Myrmidons, ye
comrades of Achilles son of Peleus, be men, my friends, and be mindful
of your impetuous valour, that so we may win honour for the son of
Peleus, that is far the bravest of the Argives by the ships, and whose
close-fighting squires are the best. And let wide-ruling Agamemnon the
son of Atreus learn his own blindness of heart, in that he nothing
honoured the best of the Achaians.”

So spake he, and aroused each man’s heart and courage, and all in a
mass they fell on the Trojans, and the ships around echoed wondrously
to the cry of the Achaians. But when the Trojans beheld the strong son
of Menoitios, himself and his squire, shining in their armour, the
heart was stirred in all of them, and the companies wavered, for they
deemed that by the ships the swift-footed son of Peleus had cast away
his wrath, and chosen reconcilement: then each man glanced round, to
see where he might flee sheer destruction.

But Patroklos first with a shining spear cast straight into the press,
where most men were thronging, even by the stern of the ship of
great-hearted Protesilaos, and he smote Pyraichmes, who led his
Paionian horsemen out of Amydon, from the wide water of Axios; him he
smote on the right shoulder, and he fell on his back in the dust with a
groan, and his comrades around him, the Paionians, were afraid, for
Patroklos sent fear among them all, when he slew their leader that was
ever the best in fight. Then he drove them out from the ships, and
quenched the burning fire. And the half-burnt ship was left there, and
the Trojans fled, with a marvellous din, and the Danaans poured in
among the hollow ships, and ceaseless was the shouting. And as when
from the high crest of a great hill Zeus, the gatherer of the
lightning, hath stirred a dense cloud, and forth shine all the peaks,
and sharp promontories, and glades, and from heaven the infinite air
breaks open, even so the Danaans, having driven the blazing fire from
the ships, for a little while took breath, but there was no pause in
the battle. For not yet were the Trojans driven in utter rout by the
Achaians, dear to Ares, from the black ships, but they still stood up
against them, and only perforce gave ground from the ships. But even as
robber wolves fall on the lambs or kids, choosing them out of the
herds, when they are scattered on hills by the witlessness of the
shepherd, and the wolves behold it, and speedily harry the younglings
that have no heart of courage,—even so the Danaans fell on the Trojans,
and they were mindful of ill-sounding flight, and forgot their
impetuous valour.

But that great Aias ever was fain to cast his spear at Hector of the
helm of bronze, but he, in his cunning of war, covered his broad
shoulders with his shield of bulls’ hide, and watched the hurtling of
the arrows, and the noise of spears. And verily well he knew the change
in the mastery of war, but even so he abode, and was striving to rescue
his trusty comrades.

And as when from Olympus a cloud fares into heaven, from the sacred
air, when Zeus spreadeth forth the tempest, even so from the ships came
the war-cry and the rout, nor in order due did they cross the ditch
again. But his swift-footed horses bare Hector forth with his arms, and
he left the host of Troy, whom the delved trench restrained against
their will. And in the trench did many swift steeds that draw the car
break the fore-part of the pole, and leave the chariots of their
masters.

But Patroklos followed after, crying fiercely to the Danaans, and full
of evil will against the Trojans, while they with cries and flight
filled all the ways, for they were scattered, and on high the storm of
dust was scattered below the clouds, and the whole-hooved horses
strained back towards the city, away from the ships and the huts.

But even where Patroklos saw the folk thickest in the rout, thither did
he guide his horses with a cry, and under his axle-trees men fell prone
from their chariots, and the cars were overturned with a din of
shattering. But straight over the ditch, in forward flight, leaped the
swift horses. And the heart of Patroklos urged him against Hector, for
he was eager to smite him, but his swift steeds bore Hector forth and
away. And even as beneath a tempest the whole black earth is oppressed,
on an autumn day, when Zeus pours forth rain most vehemently, and all
the rivers run full, and many a scaur the torrents tear away, and down
to the dark sea they rush headlong from the hills, roaring mightily,
and minished are the works of men, even so mighty was the roar of the
Trojan horses as they ran.

Now Patroklos when he had cloven the nearest companies, drave them
backward again to the ships, nor suffered them to approach the city,
despite their desire, but between the ships, and the river, and the
lofty wall, he rushed on them, and slew them, and avenged many a
comrade slain. There first he smote Pronoos with a shining spear, where
the shield left bare the breast, and loosened his limbs, and he fell
with a crash. Then Thestor the son of Enops he next assailed, as he sat
crouching in the polished chariot, for he was struck distraught, and
the reins flew from his hands. Him he drew near, and smote with the
lance on the right jaw, and clean pierced through his teeth. And
Patroklos caught hold of the spear and dragged him over the rim of the
car, as when a man sits on a jutting rock, and drags a sacred fish
forth from the sea, with line and glittering hook of bronze; so on the
bright spear dragged he Thestor gaping from the chariot, and cast him
down on his face and life left him as he fell. Next, as Euryalos came
on, he smote him on the midst of the head with a stone, and all his
head was shattered within the strong helmet, and prone on the earth he
fell, and death that slayeth the spirit overwhelmed him. Next Erymas,
and Amphoteros, and Epaltes and Tlepolemos son of Damastor, and Echios
and Pyris, and Ipheus and Euippos, and Polymelos son of Argeas, all
these in turn he brought low to the bounteous earth. But when Sarpedon
beheld his comrades with ungirdled doublets, subdued beneath the hands
of Patroklos son of Menoitios, he cried aloud, upbraiding the godlike
Lykians: “Shame, ye Lykians, whither do ye flee? Now be ye strong, for
I will encounter this man that I may know who he is that conquers here,
and verily many evils hath he wrought the Trojans, in that he hath
loosened the knees of many men and noble.”

So spake he, and leaped with his arms from the chariot to the ground.
But Patroklos, on the other side, when he beheld him leaped from his
chariot. And they, like vultures of crooked talons and curved beaks,
that war with loud yells on some high cliff, even so they rushed with
cries against each other. And beholding then the son of Kronos of the
crooked counsels took pity on them, and he spake to Hera, his sister
and wife: “Ah woe is me for that it is fated that Sarpedon, the
best-beloved of men to me, shall be subdued under Patroklos son of
Menoitios. And in two ways my heart within my breast is divided, as I
ponder whether I should catch him up alive out of the tearful war, and
set him down in the rich land of Lykia, or whether I should now subdue
him beneath the hands of the son of Menoitios.”

Then the ox-eyed lady Hera made answer to him: “Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? A mortal man long doomed to
fate dost thou desire to deliver again from death of evil name? Work
thy will, but all we other gods will in no wise praise thee. And
another thing I will tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thy heart; if
thou dost send Sarpedon living to his own house, consider lest thereon
some other god likewise desire to send his own dear son away out of the
strong battle. For round the great citadel of Priam war many sons of
the Immortals, and among the Immortals wilt thou send terrible wrath.
But if he be dear to thee, and thy heart mourns for him, truly then
suffer him to be subdued in the strong battle beneath the hands of
Patroklos son of Menoitios, but when his soul and life leave that
warrior, send Death and sweet Sleep to bear him, even till they come to
the land of wide Lykia, there will his kindred and friends bury him,
with a barrow and a pillar, for this is the due of the dead.”

So spake she, nor did the father of gods and men disregard her. But he
shed bloody raindrops on the earth, honouring his dear son, that
Patroklos was about to slay in the deep-soiled land of Troia, far off
from his own country. Now when they were come near each other in onset,
there verily did Patroklos smite the renowned Thrasymelos, the good
squire of the prince Sarpedon, on the lower part of the belly, and
loosened his limbs. But Sarpedon missed him with his shining javelin,
as he in turn rushed on, but wounded the horse Pedasos on the right
shoulder with the spear, and he shrieked as he breathed his life away,
and fell crying in the dust, and his spirit fled from him. But the
other twain reared this way and that, and the yoke creaked, and the
reins were confused on them, when their trace-horse lay in the dust.
But thereof did Automedon, the spearman renowned, find a remedy, and
drawing his long-edged sword from his stout thigh, he leaped forth, and
cut adrift the horse, with no delay, and the pair righted themselves,
and strained in the reins, and they met again in life-devouring war.

Then again Sarpedon missed with his shining dart, and the point of the
spear flew over the left shoulder of Patroklos and smote him not, but
he in turn arose with the bronze, and his javelin flew not vainly from
his hand, but struck Sarpedon even where the midriff clasps the beating
heart. And he fell as falls an oak, or a silver poplar, or a slim pine
tree, that on the hills the shipwrights fell with whetted axes, to be
timber for ship-building; even so before the horses and chariot he lay
at length, moaning aloud, and clutching at the bloody dust. And as when
a lion hath fallen on a herd, and slain a bull, tawny and high of
heart, among the kine of trailing gait, and he perishes groaning
beneath the claws of the lion, even so under Patroklos did the leader
of the Lykian shieldmen rage, even in death, and he called to his dear
comrade: “Dear Glaukos, warrior among warlike men, now most doth it
behove thee to be a spearman, and a hardy fighter: now let baneful war
be dear to thee, if indeed thou art a man of might. First fare all
about and urge on the heroes that be leaders of the Lykians, to fight
for Sarpedon, and thereafter thyself do battle for me with the sword.
For to thee even in time to come shall I be shame and disgrace for
ever, all thy days, if the Achaians strip me of mine armour, fallen in
the gathering of the ships. Nay, hold out manfully, and spur on all the
host.”

Even as he spake thus, the end of death veiled over his eyes and his
nostrils, but Patroklos, setting foot on his breast drew the spear out
of his flesh, and the midriff followed with the spear, so that he drew
forth together the spear point, and the soul of Sarpedon; and the
Myrmidons held there his panting steeds, eager to fly afar, since the
chariot was reft of its lords.

Then dread sorrow came on Glaukos, when he heard the voice of Sarpedon,
and his heart was stirred, that he availed not to succour him. And with
his hand he caught and held his arm, for the wound galled him, the
wound of the arrow wherewith, as he pressed on towards the lofty wall,
Teukros had smitten him, warding off destruction from his fellows. Then
in prayer spake Glaukos to far-darting Apollo: “Hear, O Prince that art
somewhere in the rich land of Lykia, or in Troia, for thou canst listen
everywhere to the man that is in need, as even now need cometh upon me.
For I have this stark wound, and mine arm is thoroughly pierced with
sharp pains, nor can my blood be stanched, and by the wound is my
shoulder burdened, and I cannot hold my spear firm, nor go and fight
against the enemy. And the best of men has perished, Sarpedon, the son
of Zeus, and he succours not even his own child. But do thou, O Prince,
heal me this stark wound, and lull my pains, and give me strength, that
I may call on my Lykian kinsmen, and spur them to the war, and myself
may fight about the dead man fallen.”

So spake he in his prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Straightway he
made his pains to cease, and in the grievous wound stanched the black
blood, and put courage into his heart. And Glaukos knew it within him,
and was glad, for that the great god speedily heard his prayer. First
went he all about and urged on them that were leaders of the Lykians to
fight around Sarpedon, and thereafter he went with long strides among
the Trojans, to Polydamas son of Panthoos and noble Agenor, and he went
after Aineias, and Hector of the helm of bronze, and standing by them
spake winged words: “Hector, now surely art thou utterly forgetful of
the allies, that for thy sake, far from their friends and their own
country, breathe their lives away! but thou carest not to aid them!
Sarpedon lies low, the leader of the Lykian shieldmen, he that defended
Lykia by his dooms and his might, yea him hath mailed Ares subdued
beneath the spear of Patroklos. But, friends, stand by him, and be
angry in your hearts lest the Myrmidons strip him of his harness, and
dishonour the dead, in wrath for the sake of the Danaans, even them
that perished, whom we slew with spears by the swift ships.”

So spake he, and sorrow seized the Trojans utterly, ungovernable and
not to be borne; for Sarpedon was ever the stay of their city, all a
stranger as he was, for many people followed with him, and himself the
best warrior of them all. Then they made straight for the Danaans
eagerly, and Hector led them, being wroth for Sarpedon’s sake. But the
fierce heart of Patrokloa son of Menoitios urged on the Achaians. And
he spake first to the twain Aiantes that themselves were right eager:
“Aiantes, now let defence be your desire, and be such as afore ye were
among men, or even braver yet. That man lies low who first leaped on to
the wall of the Achaians, even Sarpedon. Nay, let us strive to take
him, and work his body shame, and strip the harness from his shoulders,
and many a one of his comrades fighting for his sake let us subdue with
the pitiless bronze.”

So spake he, and they themselves were eager in defence. So on both
sides they strengthened the companies, Trojans and Lykians, Myrmidons
and Achaians, and they joined battle to fight around the dead man
fallen; terribly they shouted, and loud rang the harness of men. And as
the din ariseth of woodcutters in the glades of a mountain, and the
sound thereof is heard far away, so rose the din of them from the
wide-wayed earth, the noise of bronze and of well-tanned bulls’ hides
smitten with swords and double-pointed spears. And now not even a
clear-sighted man could any longer have known noble Sarpedon, for with
darts and blood and dust was he covered wholly from head to foot. And
ever men thronged about the dead, as in a steading flies buzz around
the full milk-pails, in the season of spring, when the milk drenches
the bowls, even so thronged they about the dead. Nor ever did Zeus turn
from the strong fight his shining eyes, but ever looked down on them,
and much in his heart he debated of the slaying of Patroklos, whether
there and then above divine Sarpedon glorious Hector should slay him
likewise in strong battle with the sword, and strip his harness from
his shoulders, or whether to more men yet he should deal sheer labour
of war. And thus to him as he pondered it seemed the better way, that
the gallant squire of Achilles, Peleus’ son, should straightway drive
the Trojans and Hector of the helm of bronze towards the city, and
should rob many of their life. And in Hector first he put a weakling
heart, and leaping into his car Hector turned in flight, and cried on
the rest of the Trojans to flee, for he knew the turning of the sacred
scales of Zeus. Thereon neither did the strong Lykians abide, but fled
all in fear, when they beheld their king stricken to the heart, lying
in the company of the dead, for many had fallen above him, when Kronion
made fierce the fight. Then the others stripped from the shoulders of
Sarpedon his shining arms of bronze, and these the strong son of
Menoitios gave to his comrades to bear to the hollow ships. Then Zeus
that gathereth the clouds spake to Apollo: “Prithee, dear Phoebus, go
take Sarpedon out of range of darts, and cleanse the black blood from
him, and thereafter bear him far away, and bathe him in the streams of
the river, and anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe him in garments
that wax not old, and send him to be wafted by fleet convoy, by the
twin brethren Sleep and Death, that quickly will set him in the rich
land of wide Lykia. There will his kinsmen and clansmen give him
burial, with barrow and pillar, for such is the due of the dead.”

So spake he, nor was Apollo disobedient to his father. He went down the
hills of Ida to the dread battle din, and straight way bore goodly
Sarpedon out of the darts, and carried him far away and bathed him in
the streams of the river, and anointed him with ambrosia, and clad him
in garments that wax not old, and sent him to be wafted by fleet
convoy, the twin brethren Sleep and Death, that swiftly set him down in
the rich land of wide Lykia. But Patroklos cried to his horses and
Automedon, and after the Trojans and Lykians went he, and so was
blindly forgetful, in his witlessness, for if he had kept the saying of
the son of Peleus, verily he should have escaped the evil fate of black
death. But ever is the wit of Zeus stronger than the wit of men, so now
he roused the spirit of Patroklos in his breast. There whom first, whom
last didst thou slay, Patroklos, when the gods called thee deathward?
Adrestos first, and Autonoos, and Echeklos, and Perimos, son of Megas,
and Epistor, and Melanippos, and thereafter Elasos, and Moulios, and
Pylartes; these he slew, but the others were each man of them fain of
flight. Then would the sons of the Achaians have taken high-gated Troy,
by the hands of Patroklos, for around and before him he raged with the
spear, but that Phoebus Apollo stood on the well-builded wall, with
baneful thoughts towards Patroklos, and succouring the Trojans. Thrice
clomb Patroklos on the corner of the lofty wall, and thrice did Apollo
force him back and smote the shining shield with his immortal hands.
But when for the fourth time he came on like a god, then cried
far-darting Apollo terribly, and spake winged words: “Give back,
Patroklos of the seed of Zeus! Not beneath thy spear is it fated that
the city of the valiant Trojans shall fall, nay nor beneath Achilles, a
man far better than thou.”

So spake he, and Patroklos retreated far back, avoiding the wrath of
far-darting Apollo. But Hector within the Skaian gates was restraining
his whole-hooved horses, pondering whether he should drive again into
the din and fight, or should call unto the host to gather to the wall.
While thus he was thinking, Phoebus Apollo stood by him in the guise of
a young man and a strong, Asios, who was the mother’s brother of
horse-taming Hector, being own brother of Hekabe, and son of Dymas, who
dwelt in Phrygia, on the streams of Sangarios. In his guise spake
Apollo, son of Zeus, to Hector: “Hector, wherefore dost thou cease from
fight? It doth not behove thee. Would that I were as much stronger than
thou as I am weaker, thereon quickly shouldst thou stand aloof from war
to thy hurt. But come, turn against Patroklos thy strong-hooved horses,
if perchance thou mayst slay him, and Apollo give thee glory.”

So spake the god, and went back again into the moil of men. But
renowned Hector bade wise-hearted Kebriones to lash his horses into the
war. Then Apollo went and passed into the press, and sent a dread panic
among the Argives, but to the Trojans and Hector gave he renown. And
Hector let the other Argives be, and slew none of them, but against
Patroklos he turned his strong-hooved horses, and Patroklos on the
other side leaped from his chariot to the ground, with a spear in his
left hand, and in his other hand grasped a shining jagged stone, that
his hand covered. Firmly he planted himself and hurled it, nor long did
he shrink from his foe, nor was his cast in vain, but he struck
Kebriones the charioteer of Hector, the bastard son of renowned Priam,
on the brow with the sharp stone, as he held the reins of the horses.
Both his brows the stone drave together, and his bone held not, but his
eyes fell to the ground in the dust, there, in front of his feet. Then
he, like a diver, fell from the well-wrought car, and his spirit left
his bones. Then taunting him didst thou address him, knightly
Patroklos: “Out on it, how nimble a man, how lightly he diveth! Yea, if
perchance he were on the teeming deep, this man would satisfy many by
seeking for oysters, leaping from the ship, even if it were stormy
weather, so lightly now he diveth from the chariot into the plain.
Verily among the Trojans too there be diving men.”

So speaking he set on the hero Kebriones with the rush of a lion, that
while wasting the cattle-pens is smitten in the breast, and his own
valour is his bane, even so against Kebriones, Patroklos, didst thou
leap furiously. But Hector, on the other side, leaped from his chariot
to the ground. And these twain strove for Kebriones like lions, that on
the mountain peaks fight, both hungering, both high of heart, for a
slain hind. Even so for Kebriones’ sake these two masters of the
war-cry, Patroklos son of Menoitios, and renowned Hector, were eager
each to hew the other’s flesh with the ruthless bronze.

Hector then seized him by the head, and slackened not hold, while
Patroklos on the other side grasped him by the foot, and thereon the
others, Trojans and Danaans, joined strong battle. And as the East wind
and the South contend with one another in shaking a deep wood in the
dells of a mountain, shaking beech, and ash, and smooth-barked cornel
tree, that clash against each other their long boughs with marvellous
din, and a noise of branches broken, so the Trojans and Achaians were
leaping on each other and slaying, nor had either side any thought of
ruinous flight. And many sharp darts were fixed around Kebriones, and
winged arrows leaping from the bow-string, and many mighty stones smote
the shields of them that fought around him. But he in the whirl of dust
lay mighty and mightily fallen, forgetful of his chivalry.

Now while the sun was going about mid-heaven, so long the darts smote
either side, and the host fell, but when the sun turned to the time of
the loosing of oxen, lo, then beyond their doom the Achaians proved the
better. The hero Kebriones drew they forth from the darts, out of the
tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the harness from his shoulders, and
with ill design against the Trojans, Patroklos rushed upon them. Three
times then rushed he on, peer of swift Ares, shouting terribly, and
thrice he slew nine men. But when the fourth time he sped on like a
god, thereon to thee, Patroklos, did the end of life appear, for
Phoebus met thee in the strong battle, in dreadful wise. And Patroklos
was not ware of him coming through the press, for hidden in thick mist
did he meet him, and stood behind him, and smote his back and broad
shoulders with a down-stroke of his hand, and his eyes were dazed. And
from his head Phoebus Apollo smote the helmet that rolled rattling away
with a din beneath the hooves of the horses, the helm with upright
socket, and the crests were defiled with blood and dust. And all the
long-shadowed spear was shattered in the hands of Patroklos, the spear
great and heavy and strong, and sharp, while from his shoulders the
tasselled shield with the baldric fell to the ground.

And the prince Apollo, son of Zeus, loosed his corslet, and blindness
seized his heart and his shining limbs were unstrung, and he stood in
amaze, and at close quarters from behind a Dardanian smote him on the
back, between the shoulders, with a sharp spear, even Euphorbos, son of
Panthoos, who excelled them of his age in casting the spear, and in
horsemanship, and in speed of foot. Even thus, verily, had he cast down
twenty men from their chariots, though then first had he come with his
car to learn the lesson of war. He it was that first smote a dart into
thee, knightly Patroklos, nor overcame thee, but ran back again and
mingled with the throng, first drawing forth from the flesh his ashen
spear, nor did he abide the onset of Patroklos, unarmed as he was, in
the strife. But Patroklos, being overcome by the stroke of the god, and
by the spear, gave ground, and retreated to the host of his comrades,
avoiding Fate. But Hector, when he beheld great-hearted Patroklos give
ground, being smitten with the keen bronze, came nigh unto him through
the ranks, and wounded him with a spear, in the lowermost part of the
belly, and drave the bronze clean through. And he fell with a crash,
and sorely grieved the host of Achaians. And as when a lion hath
overcome in battle an untiring boar, they twain fighting with high
heart on the crests of a hill, about a little well, and both are
desirous to drink, and the lion hath by force overcome the boar that
draweth difficult breath; so after that he had slain many did Hector
son of Priam take the life away from the strong son of Menoitios,
smiting him at close quarters with the spear; and boasting over him he
spake winged words: “Patroklos, surely thou saidst that thou wouldst
sack my town, and from Trojan women take away the day of freedom, and
bring them in ships to thine own dear country: fool! nay, in front of
these were the swift horses of Hector straining their speed for the
fight; and myself in wielding the spear excel among the war-loving
Trojans, even I who ward from them the day of destiny: but thee shall
vultures here devour. Ah, wretch, surely Achilles for all his valour,
availed thee not, who straitly charged thee as thou camest, he abiding
there, saying, ‘Come not to me, Patroklos lord of steeds, to the hollow
ships, till thou hast torn the gory doublet of man-slaying Hector about
his breast;’ so, surely, he spake to thee, and persuaded the wits of
thee in thy witlessness.”

Then faintly didst thou answer him, knightly Patroklos: “Boast greatly,
as now, Hector, for to thee have Zeus, son of Kronos, and Apollo given
the victory, who lightly have subdued me; for themselves stripped my
harness from my shoulders. But if twenty such as thou had encountered
me, here had they all perished, subdued beneath my spear. But me have
ruinous Fate and the son of Leto slain, and of men Euphorbos, but thou
art the third in my slaying. But another thing will I tell thee, and do
thou lay it up in thy heart: verily thou thyself art not long to live,
but already doth Death stand hard by thee, and strong Fate, that thou
art to be subdued by the hands of noble Achilles, of the seed of
Aiakos.”

Even as so he spake the end of death overshadowed him. And his soul,
fleeting from his limbs, went down to the house of Hades, wailing its
own doom, leaving manhood and youth.

Then renowned Hector spake to him even in his death: “Patroklos,
wherefore to me dolt thou prophesy sheer destruction? who knows but
that Achilles, the child of fair-tressed Thetis, will first be smitten
by my spear, and lose his life?”

So spake he, and drew the spear of bronze from the wound, setting his
foot on the dead, and cast him off on his back from the spear. And
straightway with the spear he went after Automedon, the godlike squire
of the swift-footed Aiakides, for he was eager to smite him; but his
swift-footed immortal horses bare him out of the battle, horses that
the gods gave to Peleus, a splendid gift.




BOOK XVII.


Of the battle around the body of Patroklos.


But Atreus’ son, Menelaos dear to Ares, was not unaware of the slaying
of Patroklos by the Trojans in the fray. He went up through the front
of the fight harnessed in flashing bronze, and strode over the body as
above a first-born calf standeth lowing its mother. Thus above
Patroklos strode fair-haired Menelaos, and before him held his spear
and the circle of his shield, eager to slay whoever should encounter
him. Then was Panthoos’ son of the stout ashen spear not heedless of
noble Patroklos as he lay, and he smote on the circle of the shield of
Menelaos, but the bronze spear brake it not, but the point was bent
back in the stubborn shield. And Menelaos Atreus’ son in his turn made
at him with his bronze spear, having prayed unto father Zeus, and as he
gave back pierced the nether part of his throat, and threw his weight
into the stroke, following his heavy hand; and sheer through the tender
neck went the point of the spear. And he fell with a crash, and his
armour rang upon him. In blood was his hair drenched that was like unto
the hair of the Graces, and his tresses closely knit with bands of
silver and gold.

Then easily would the son of Atreus have borne off the noble spoils of
Panthoos’ son, had not Phoebus Apollo grudged it to him, and aroused
against him Hector peer of swift Ares, putting on the semblance of a
man, of Mentes chief of the Kikones. And he spake aloud to him winged
words: “Hector, now art thou hasting after things unattainable, even
the horses of wise Aiakides; for hard are they to be tamed or driven by
mortal man, save only Achilles whom an immortal mother bare. Meanwhile
hath warlike Menelaos Atreus’ son stridden over Patroklos and slain the
best of the Trojans there, even Panthoos’ son Euphorbos, and hath
stayed him in his impetuous might.”

Thus saying the god went back into the strife of men, but dire grief
darkened Hectors inmost soul, and then he gazed searchingly along the
lines, and straightway was aware of the one man stripping off the noble
arms, and the other lying on the earth; and blood was flowing about the
gaping wound. Then he went through the front of the fight harnessed in
flashing bronze, crying a shrill cry, like unto Hephaistos’ flame
unquenchable. Not deaf to his shrill cry was Atreus’ son, and sore
troubled he spake to his great heart: “Ay me, if I shall leave behind
me these goodly arms, and Patroklos who here lieth for my vengeance’
sake, I fear lest some Danaan beholding it be wroth against me. But if
for honour’s sake I do battle alone with Hector and the Trojans, I fear
lest they come about me many against one; for all the Trojans is
bright-helmed Hector leading hither. But if I might somewhere find Aias
of the loud war-cry, then both together would we go and be mindful of
battle even were it against the power of heaven, if haply we might save
his dead for Achilles Peleus’ son: that were best among these ills.”

While thus he communed with his mind and heart, therewithal the Trojan
ranks came onward, and Hector at their head. Then Menelaos gave
backward, and left the dead man, turning himself ever about like a
deep-waned lion which men and dogs chase from a fold with spears and
cries; and his strong heart within him groweth chill, and loth goeth he
from the steading; so from Patroklos went fair-haired Menelaos, and
turned and stood, when he came to the host of his comrades, searching
for mighty Aias Telamon’s son. Him very speedily he espied on the left
of the whole battle, cheering his comrades and rousing them to fight,
for great terror had Phoebus Apollo sent on them; and he hasted him to
run, and straightway stood by him and said: “This way, beloved Aias;
let us bestir us for the dead Patroklos, if haply his naked corpse at
least we may carry to Achilles, though his armour is held by Hector of
the glancing helm.”

Thus spake he, and aroused the heart of wise Aias. And he went up
through the front of the fight, and with him fair-haired Menelaos. Now
Hector, when he had stripped from Patroklos his noble armour, was
dragging him thence that he might cut off the head from the shoulders
with the keen bronze and carry his body to give to the dogs of Troy.
But Aias came anigh, and the shield that he bare was as a tower; then
Hector gave back into the company of his comrades, and sprang into his
chariot; and the goodly armour he gave to the Trojans to carry to the
city, to be great glory unto him. But Aias spread his broad shield over
the son of Menoitios and stood as it were a lion before his whelps when
huntsmen in a forest encounter him as he leadeth his young. And by his
side stood Atreus’ son, Menelaos dear to Ares, nursing great sorrow in
his breast.

Then Hector called on the Trojans with a mighty shout; “Trojans and
Lykians and Dardanians that fight hand to hand, be men, my friends, and
bethink you of impetuous valour, until I do on me the goodly arms of
noble Achilles that I stripped from brave Patroklos when I slew him.”

Thus having spoken went Hector of the glancing helm forth out of the
strife of war, and ran and speedily with fleet feet following overtook
his comrades, not yet far off, who were bearing to the city Peleides’
glorious arms. And standing apart from the dolorous battle he changed
his armour; his own he gave the warlike Trojans to carry to sacred
Ilios, and he put on the divine arms of Achilles, Peleus’ son.

But when Zeus that gathereth the clouds beheld from afar off Hector
arming him in the armour of Peleus’ godlike son, he shook his head and
spake thus unto his soul: “Ah, hapless man, no thought is in thy heart
of death that yet draweth nigh unto thee; thou doest on thee the divine
armour of a peerless man before whom the rest have terror. His comrade,
gentle and brave, thou hast slain, and unmeetly hast stripped the
armour from his head and shoulders; yet now for a while at least I will
give into thy hands great might, in recompense for this, even that
nowise shalt thou come home out of the battle, for Andromache to
receive from thee Peleides’ glorious arms.”

Thus spake the son of Kronos, and bowed his dark brows therewithal.

But the armour fitted itself unto Hectors body, and Ares the dread
war-god entered into him, and his limbs were filled within with valour
and strength. Then he sped among the noble allies with a mighty cry,
and in the flashing of his armour he seemed to all of them like unto
Peleus’ great-hearted son. And he came to each and encouraged him with
his words—Mesthles and Glaukos and Medon and Thersilochos and
Asteropaios and Deisenor and Hippothoos and Phorkys and Chromios and
the augur Ennomos—these encouraged he and spake to them winged words:
“Listen, ye countless tribes of allies that dwell round about. It was
not for mere numbers that I sought or longed when I gathered each of
you from your cities, but that ye might zealously guard the Trojans’
wives and infant little ones from the war-loving Achaians. For this end
am I wearying my people by taking gifts and food from them, and nursing
thereby the courage of each of you. Now therefore let all turn straight
against the foe and live or die, for such is the dalliance of war. And
whoso shall drag Patroklos, dead though he be, among the horse-taming
men of Troy, and make Aias yield, to him will I award half the spoils
and keep half myself; so shall his glory be great as mine.”

Thus spake he, and they against the Danaans charged with all their
weight, levelling their spears, and their hearts were high of hope to
drag the corpse from under Aias, Telamon’s son. Fond men! from full
many reft he life over that corpse. And then spake Aias to Menelaos of
the loud war-cry: “Dear Menelaos, fosterling of Zeus, no longer count I
that we two of ourselves shall return home out of the war. Nor have I
so much dread for the corpse of Patroklos, that shall soon glut the
dogs and birds of the men of Troy, as for thy head and mine lest some
evil fall thereon, for all is shrouded by a storm-cloud of war, even by
Hector, and sheer doom stareth in our face. But come, call thou to the
best men of the Danaans, if haply any hear.”

Thus spake he, and Menelaos of the loud war-cry disregarded him not,
but shouted unto the Danaans, crying a far-heard cry: “O friends, ye
leaders and counsellors of the Argives, who by the side of the sons of
Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaos, drink at the common cost and are all
commanders of the host, on whom wait glory and honour from Zeus, hard
is it for me to distinguish each chief amid the press—such blaze is
there of the strife of war. But let each go forward of himself and be
wroth at heart that Patroklos should become a sport among the dogs of
Troy.”

Thus spake he, and Oileus’ son fleet Aias heard him clearly, and was
first to run along the mellay to meet him, and after him Idomeneus, and
Idomeneus’ brother-in-arms, Meriones, peer of the man-slaying war-god.
And who shall of his own thought tell the names of the rest, even of
all that after these aroused the battle of the Achaians?

Now the Trojans charged forward in close array, and Hector led them.
And as when at the mouth of some heaven-born river a mighty wave
roareth against the stream, and arouseth the high cliffs’ echo as the
salt sea belloweth on the beach, so loud was the cry wherewith the
Trojans came. But the Achaians stood firm around Menoitios’ son with
one soul all, walled in with shields of bronze. And over their bright
helmets the son of Kronos shed thick darkness, for in the former time
was Menoitios’ son not unloved of him, while he was yet alive and
squire of Aiakides. So was Zeus loth that he should become a prey of
the dogs of his enemies at Troy, and stirred his comrades to do battle
for him.

Now first the Trojans thrust back the glancing-eyed Achaians, who
shrank before them and left the dead, yet the proud Trojans slew not
any of them with spears, though they were fain, but set to hale the
corpse. But little while would the Achaians hold back therefrom, for
very swiftly Aias rallied them, Aias the first in presence and in deeds
of all the Danaans after the noble son of Peleus. Right through the
fighters in the forefront rushed he like a wild boar in his might that
in the mountains when he turneth at bay scattereth lightly dogs and
lusty young men through the glades. Thus did proud Telamon’s son the
glorious Aias press on the Trojan battalions and lightly scatter them,
as they had bestrode Patroklos and were full fain to drag him to their
city and win renown.

Then would the Trojans in their turn in their weakness overcome have
been driven back into Ilios by the Achaians dear to Ares, and the
Argives would have won glory even against the appointment of Zeus by
their power and might. But Apollo himself aroused Aineias, putting on
the semblance of Periphas the herald, the son of Epytos, who grew old
with his old father in his heraldship, of friendly thought toward
Aineias. In his similitude spake Apollo, son of Zeus: “Aineias, how
could ye ever guard high Ilios if it were against the will of God?
Other men have I seen that trust in their own might and power and
valour, and in their host, even though they have scant folk to lead.
But here, albeit Zeus is fainer far to give victory to us than to the
Danaans, yet ye are dismayed exceedingly and fight not.”

Thus spake he, and Aineias knew far-darting Apollo when he looked upon
his face, and spake unto Hector, shouting loud “Hector and ye other
leaders of the Trojans and their allies, shame were this if in our
weakness overcome we were driven back into Ilios by the Achaians dear
to Ares. Nay, thus saith a god, who standeth by my side: Zeus, highest
Orderer, is our helper in this fight. Therefore let us go right onward
against the Danaans. Not easily at least let them take the dead
Patroklos to the ships.”

Thus spake he, and leapt forth far before the fighters in the front.
And the Trojans rallied and stood up against the Achaians. Thus strove
they as it had been fire, nor wouldst thou have thought there was still
sun or moon, for over all the battle where the chiefs stood around the
slain son of Menoitios they were shrouded in darkness, while the other
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians fought at ease in the clear air, and
piercing sunlight was spread over them, and on all the earth and hills
there was no cloud seen; and they ceased fighting now sad again,
avoiding each other’s dolorous darts and standing far apart. But they
who were in the midst endured affliction of the darkness and the
battle, and all the best men of them were wearied by the pitiless
weight of their bronze arms.

Thus all day long waxed the mighty fray of their sore strife; and
unabatingly ever with the sweat of toil were the knees and legs and
feet of each man and arms anal eyes bedewed as the two hosts did battle
around the brave squire of fleet Aiakides. And as when a man giveth the
hide of a great bull to his folk to stretch, all soaked in fat, and
they take and stretch it standing in a circle, and straightway the
moisture thereof departeth and the fat entereth in under the haling of
many hands, and it is all stretched throughout,—thus they on both sides
haled the dead man this way and that in narrow space, for their hearts
were high of hope, the Trojans that they should drag him to Ilios and
the Achaians to the hollow ships; and around him the fray waxed wild,
nor might Ares rouser of hosts nor Athene despise the sight thereof,
albeit their anger were exceeding great.

Such was the grievous travail of men and horses over Patroklos that
Zeus on that day wrought. But not as yet knew noble Achilles aught of
Patroklos’ death, for far away from the swift ships they were fighting
beneath the wall of the men of Troy. Therefore never deemed he in his
heart that he was dead, but that he should come back alive, after that
he had touched the gates; for neither that other thought had he
anywise, that Patroklos should sack the stronghold without his aid.

Now the rest continually around the dead man with their keen spears
made onset relentlessly and slew each the other. And thus would one
speak among the mail-clad Achaians: “Friends, it were verily not
glorious for us to go back to the hollow ships; rather let the black
earth yawn for us all beneath our feet. Far better were that
straightway for us if we suffer the horse-taming Trojans to hale this
man to their city and win renown.”

And thus on the other side would one of the great-hearted Trojans say:
“Friends, though it were our fate that all together we be slain beside
this man, let none yet give backward from the fray.”

Thus would one speak, and rouse the spirit of each. So they fought on,
and the iron din went up through the high desert air unto the brazen
heaven. But the horses of Aiakides that were apart from the battle were
weeping, since first they were aware that their charioteer was fallen
in the dust beneath the hand of man-slaying Hector. Verily Automedon,
Diores’ valiant son, plied them oft with blows of the swift lash, and
oft with gentle words he spake to them and oft with chiding, yet would
they neither go back to the ships at the broad Hellespont nor yet to
the battle after the Achaians, but as a pillar abideth firm that
standeth on the tomb of a man or woman dead, so abode they immovably
with the beautiful chariot, abasing their heads unto the earth. And hot
tears flowed from their eyes to the ground as they mourned in sorrow
for their charioteer, and their rich manes were soiled as they drooped
from beneath the yoke-cushion on both sides beside the yoke. And when
the son of Kronos beheld them mourning he had compassion on them, and
shook his head and spake to his own heart: “Ah, hapless pair, why gave
we you to king Peleus, a mortal man, while ye are deathless and ever
young? Was it that ye should suffer sorrows among ill-fated men? For
methinketh there is nothing more piteous than a man among all things
that breathe and creep upon the earth. But verily Hector Priam’s son
shall not drive you and your deftly-wrought car; that will I not
suffer. Is it a small thing that he holdeth the armour and vaunteth
himself vainly thereupon? Nay, I will put courage into your knees and
heart that ye may bring Automedon also safe out of the war to the
hollow ships. For yet further will I increase victory to the men of
Troy, so that they slay until they come unto the well-timbered ships,
and the sun set and divine night come down.”

Thus saying he breathed good courage into the horses. And they shook to
earth the dust from their manes, and lightly bare the swift car amid
Trojans and Achaians. And behind them fought Automedon, albeit in grief
for his comrade, swooping with his chariot as a vulture on wild geese;
for lightly he would flee out of the onset of the Trojans and lightly
charge, pursuing them through the thick mellay. Yet could he not slay
any man as he halted to pursue them, for it was impossible that being
alone in his sacred car he should at once assail them with the spear
and hold his fleet horses. Then at last espied him a comrade, even
Alkimedon son of Laerkes, son of Haimon, and he halted behind the car
and spake unto Automedon: “Automedon, what god hath put into thy breast
unprofitable counsel and taken from thee wisdom, that thus alone thou
art fighting against the Trojans in the forefront of the press? Thy
comrade even now was slain, and Hector goeth proudly, wearing on his
own shoulders the armour of Aiakides.”

And Automedon son of Diores answered him, saying: “Alkimedon, what
other Achaian hath like skill to guide the spirit of immortal steeds,
save only Patroklos, peer of gods in counsel, while he yet lived? but
now have death and fate overtaken him. But take thou the lash and
shining reins, and I will get me down from my horses, that I may
fight.”

Thus spake he, and Alkimedon leapt on the fleet war-chariot and swiftly
took the lash and reins in his hands, and Automedon leapt down. And
noble Hector espied them, and straightway spake unto Aineias as he
stood near: “Aineias, counsellor of mail-clad Trojans, I espy here the
two horses of fleet Aiakides come forth to battle with feeble
charioteers. Therefore might I hope to take them if thou in thy heart
art willing, since they would not abide our onset and stand to do
battle against us.”

Thus spake he, and the brave son of Anchises disregarded him not. And
they twain went right onward, their shoulders shielded by ox-hides
dried and tough, and bronze thick overlaid. And with them went both
Chromios and godlike Aretos, and their hearts were of high hope to slay
the men and drive off the strong-necked horses—fond hope, for not
without blood lost were they to get them back from Automedon. He
praying to father Zeus was filled in his inmost heart with valour and
strength. And straightway he spake to Alkimedon, his faithful comrade:
“Alkimedon, hold the horses not far from me, but with their very breath
upon my back; for I deem that Hector the son of Priam will not refrain
him from his fury until he mount behind Achilles’ horses of goodly
manes after slaying us twain, and dismay the ranks of Argive men, or
else himself fall among the foremost.”

Thus said he, and called upon the Aiantes and Menelaos: “Aiantes,
leaders of the Argives, and Menelaos, lo now, commit ye the corpse unto
whoso may best avail to bestride it and resist the ranks of men, and
come ye to ward the day of doom from us who are yet alive, for here in
the dolorous war are Hector and Aineias, the best men of the Trojans,
pressing hard. Yet verily these issues lie in the lap of the gods: I
too will cast my spear, and the rest shall Zeus decide.”

He said, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled it, and smote on
the circle of the shield of Aretos, and the shield sustained not the
spear, but right through went the bronze, and he forced it into his
belly low down through his belt. And as when a strong man with a sharp
axe smiting behind the horns of an ox of the homestead cleaveth the
sinew asunder, and the ox leapeth forward and falleth, so leapt Aretos
forward and fell on his back; and the spear in his entrails very
piercingly quivering unstrung his limbs. And Hector hurled at Automedon
with his bright spear, but he looked steadfastly on the bronze javelin
as it came at him and avoided it, for he stooped forward, and the long
spear fixed itself in the ground behind, and the javelin-butt quivered,
and there dread Ares took away its force. And then had they lashed at
each other with their swords hand to hand, had not the Aiantes parted
them in their fury, when they were come through the mellay at their
comrades’ call. Before them Hector and Aineias and godlike Chromios
shrank backward and gave ground and left Aretos wounded to the death as
he lay. And Automedon, peer of swift Ares, stripped off the armour of
the dead, and spake exultingly: “Verily, I have a little eased my heart
of grief for the death of Menoitios’ son, albeit a worse man than him
have I slain.”

Thus saying he took up the gory spoils and set them in his car, and gat
him thereon, with feet and hands all bloody, as a lion that hath
devoured a bull.

Now great-hearted Aias and Menelaos were aware of Zeus how he gave the
Trojans their turn to victory. First of these to speak was great Aias
son of Telamon: “Ay me, now may any man, even though he be a very fool,
know that father Zeus himself is helping the Trojans. Come, let us
ourselves devise some excellent means, that we may both hale the corpse
away and ourselves return home to the joy of our friends, who grieve as
they look hitherward and deem that no longer shall the fury of
man-slaying Hector’s unapproachable hand refrain itself, but fall upon
the black ships. And would there were some comrade to carry tidings
with all speed unto the son of Peleus, since I deem that he hath not
even heard the grievous tidings, how his dear comrade is slain. But
nowhere can I behold such an one among the Achaians, for themselves and
their horses likewise are wrapped in darkness. O father Zeus, deliver
thou the sons of the Achaians from the darkness, and make clear sky and
vouchsafe sight unto our eyes. In the light be it that thou slayest us,
since it is thy good pleasure that we die.”

Then fair-haired Menelaos departed glancing everywhither, as an eagle
which men say hath keenest sight of all birds under heaven, and though
he be far aloft the fleet-footed hare eludeth him not by crouching
beneath a leafy bush, but the eagle swoopeth thereon and swiftly
seizeth her and taketh her life. Thus in that hour, Menelaos fosterling
of Zeus, ranged thy shining eyes everywhither through the multitude of
the host of thy comrades, if haply they might behold Nestor’s son yet
alive. Him quickly he perceived at the left of the whole battle,
heartening his comrades and rousing them to fight. And fair-haired
Menelaos came and stood nigh and said unto him: “Antilochos, fosterling
of Zeus, come hither that thou mayest learn woful tidings—would it had
never been. Ere now, I ween, thou too hast known by thy beholding that
God rolleth mischief upon the Danaans, and with the Trojans is victory.
And slain is the best man of the Achaians, Patroklos, and great sorrow
is wrought for the Danaans. But run thou to the ships of the Achaians
and quickly tell this to Achilles, if haply he may straightway rescue
to his ship the naked corpse: but his armour is held by Hector of the
glancing helmet.”

Thus spake he, and Antilochos had horror of the word he heard. And long
time speechlessness possessed him, and his eyes were filled with tears,
and his full voice choked. Yet for all this disregarded he not the
bidding of Menelaos, but set him to run, when he had given his armour
to a noble comrade, Laodokos, who close anigh him was wheeling his
whole-hooved horses.

So him his feet bare out of the battle weeping, to Achilles son of
Peleus carrying an evil tale. But thy heart, Menelaos fosterling of
Zeus, chose not to stay to aid the wearied comrades from whom
Antilochos departed, and great sorrow was among the Pylians. But to
them Menelaos sent noble Thrasymedes, and himself went again to
bestride the hero Patroklos. And he hasted and stood beside the Aiantes
and straightway spake to them: “So have I sent that man to the swift
ships to go to fleet-footed Achilles. Yet deem I not that he will now
come, for all his wrath against noble Hector, for he could not fight
unarmed against the men of Troy. But let us ourselves devise some
excellent means, both how we may hale the dead away, and how we
ourselves may escape death and fate amid the Trojans’ battle-cry.”

Then answered him great Aias Telamon’s son, saying: “All this hast thou
said well, most noble Menelaos. But do thou and Meriones put your
shoulders beneath the dead and lift him and bear him swiftly out of the
fray, while we twain behind you shall do battle with the Trojans and
noble Hector, one in heart as we are in name, for from of old time we
are wont to await fierce battle side by side.”

Thus spake he, and the others took the dead man in their arms and
lifted him mightily on high. But the Trojan host behind cried aloud
when they saw the Achaians lifting the corpse, and charged like hounds
that spring in front of hunter-youths upon a wounded wild boar, and for
a while run in haste to rend him, but when he wheeleth round among
them, trusting in his might, then they give ground and shrink back here
and there. Thus for a while the Trojans pressed on with all their
power, striking with swords and double-headed spears, but when the
Aiantes turned about and halted over against them, then they changed
colour, and none dared farther onset to do battle around the dead.




BOOK XVIII.


How Achilles grieved for Patroklos, and how Thetis asked for him new
armour of Hephaistos; and of the making of the armour.


Thus fought the rest in the likeness of blazing fire, while to Achilles
came Antilochos, a messenger fleet of foot. Him found he in front of
his ships of upright horns, boding in his soul the things which even
now were accomplished. And sore troubled he spake to his great heart:
“Ay me, wherefore again are the flowing-haired Achaians flocking to the
ships and flying in rout over the plain? May the gods not have wrought
against me the grievous fears at my heart, even as my mother revealed
and told me that while I am yet alive the best man of the Myrmidons
must by deed of the men of Troy forsake the light of the sun. Surely
now must Menoitios’ valiant son be dead—foolhardy! surely I bade him
when he should have beaten off the fire of the foe to come back to the
ships nor with Hector fight amain.”

While thus he held debate in his heart and soul, there drew nigh unto
him noble Nestor’s son, shedding hot tears, and spake his grievous
tidings: “Ay me, wise Peleus’ son, very bitter tidings must thou hear,
such as I would had never been. Fallen is Patroklos, and they are
fighting around his body, naked, for his armour is held by Hector of
the glancing helm.”

Thus spake he, and a black cloud of grief enwrapped Achilles, and with
both hands he took dark dust and poured it over his head and defiled
his comely face, and on his fragrant doublet black ashes fell. And
himself in the dust lay mighty and mightily fallen, and with his own
hands tore and marred his hair. And the handmaidens, whom Achilles and
Patroklos took captive, cried aloud in the grief of their hearts, and
ran forth around valiant Achilles, and all beat on their breasts with
their hands, and the knees of each of them were unstrung. And
Antilochos on the other side wailed and shed tears, holding Achilles’
hands while he groaned in his noble heart, for he feared lest he should
cleave his throat with the sword. Then terribly moaned Achilles; and
his lady mother heard him as she sate in the depths of the sea beside
her ancient sire. And thereon she uttered a cry, and the goddesses
flocked around her, all the daughters of Nereus that were in the deep
of the sea. With these the bright cave was filled, and they all beat
together on their breasts, and Thetis led the lament: “Listen, sister
Nereids, that ye all hear and know well what sorrows are in my heart.
Ay me unhappy, ay me that bare to my sorrow the first of men! For after
I had borne a son noble and strong, the chief of heroes, and he shot up
like a young branch, then when I had reared him as a plant in a very
fruitful field I sent him in beaked ships to Ilios to fight against the
men of Troy; but never again shall I welcome him back to his home, to
the house of Peleus. And while he yet liveth in my sight and beholdeth
the light of the sun, he sorroweth, neither can I help him any whit
though I go unto him. But I will go, that I may look upon my dear
child, and learn what sorrow hath come to him though he abide aloof
from the war.”

Thus spake she and left the cave; and the nymphs went with her weeping,
and around them the surge of the sea was sundered. And when they came
to deep-soiled Troy-land they went up upon the shore in order, where
the ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up thickly around fleet Achilles.
And as he groaned heavily his lady mother stood beside him, and with a
shrill cry clasped the bead of her child, and spake unto him winged
words of lamentation: “My child, why weepest thou? what sorrow hath
come to thy heart? Tell it forth, hide it not. One thing at least hath
been accomplished of Zeus according to the prayer thou madest, holding
up to him thy hands, that the sons of the Achaians should all be pent
in at the ships, through lack of thee, and should suffer hateful
things.”

Then groaning heavily spake unto her Achilles fleet of foot: “My
mother, that prayer truly hath the Olympian accomplished for me. But
what delight have I therein, since my dear comrade is dead, Patroklos,
whom I honoured above all my comrades as it were my very self! Him have
I lost, and Hector that slew him hath stripped from him the armour
great and fair, a wonder to behold, that the gods gave to Peleus a
splendid gift, on the day when they laid thee in the bed of a mortal
man. Would thou hadst abode among the deathless daughters of the sea,
and Peleus had wedded a mortal bride! But now, that thou mayest have
sorrow a thousand fold in thy heart for a dead son, never shalt thou
welcome him back home, since my soul biddeth me also live no longer nor
abide among men, if Hector be not first smitten by my spear and yield
his life, and pay for his slaughter of Patroklos, Menoitios’ son.”

Then answered unto him Thetis shedding tears: “Short-lived, I ween,
must thou be then, my child, by what thou sayest, for straightway after
Hector is death appointed unto thee.”

Then mightily moved spake unto her Achilles fleet of foot: “Straightway
may I die, since I might not succour my comrade at his slaying. He hath
fallen afar from his country and lacked my help in his sore need. Now
therefore, since I go not back to my dear native land, neither have at
all been succour to Patroklos nor to all my other comrades that have
been slain by noble Hector, but I sit beside my ships a profitless
burden of the earth, I that in war am such an one as is none else of
the mail-clad Achaians, though in council are others better—may strife
perish utterly among gods and men, and wrath that stirreth even a wise
man to be vexed, wrath that far sweeter than trickling honey waxeth
like smoke in the breasts of men, even as I was wroth even now against
Agamemnon king of men. But bygones will we let be, for all our pain,
curbing the heart in our breasts under necessity. Now go I forth, that
I may light on the destroyer of him I loved, on Hector: then will I
accept my death whensoever Zeus willeth to accomplish it and the other
immortal gods. For not even the mighty Herakles escaped death, albeit
most dear to Kronian Zeus the king, but Fate overcame him and Hera’s
cruel wrath. So also shall I, if my fate hath been fashioned likewise,
lie low when I am dead. But now let me win high renown, let me set some
Trojan woman, some deep-bosomed daughter of Dardanos, staunching with
both hands the tears upon her tender cheeks and wailing bitterly; yea,
let them know that I am come back, though I tarried long from the war.
Hold not me then from the battle in thy love, for thou shalt not
prevail with me.”

Then Thetis the silver-footed goddess answered him, saying: “Yea
verily, my child, no blame is in this, that thou ward sheer destruction
from thy comrades in their distress. But thy fair glittering armour of
bronze is held among the Trojans. Hector of the glancing helm beareth
it on his shoulders in triumph, yet not for long, I ween, shall he
glory therein, for death is hard anigh him. But thou, go not yet down
into the mellay of war until thou see me with thine eyes come hither.
In the morning will I return, at the coming up of the sun, bearing fair
armour from the king Hephaistos.”

Thus spake she and turned to go from her son, and as she turned she
spake among her sisters of the sea: “Ye now go down within the wide
bosom of the deep, to visit the Ancient One of the Sea and our father’s
house, and tell him all. I am going to high Olympus to Hephaistos of
noble skill, if haply he will give unto my son noble armour shining
gloriously.”

Thus spake she, and they forthwith went down beneath the surge of the
sea. And the silver-footed goddess Thetis went on to Olympus that she
might bring noble armour to her son.

So her unto Olympus her feet bore. But the Achaians with terrible cries
were fleeing before man-slaying Hector till they came to the ships and
to the Hellespont. Nor might the well-greaved Achaians drag the corpse
of Patroklos Achilles’ squire out of the darts, for now again overtook
him the host and the horses of Troy, and Hector son of Priam, in might
as it were a flame of fire. Thrice did glorious Hector seize him from
behind by the feet, resolved to drag him away, and mightily called upon
the men of Troy. Thrice did the two Aiantes, clothed on with impetuous
might, beat him off from the dead man, but he nathless, trusting in his
might, anon would charge into the press, anon would stand and cry
aloud, but he gave ground never a whit. As when shepherds in the field
avail nowise to chase a fiery lion in fierce hunger away from a
carcase, so availed not the two warrior Aiantes to scare Hector son of
Priam from the dead. And now would he have won the body and gained
renown unspeakable, had not fleet wind-footed Iris come speeding from
Olympus with a message to the son of Peleus to array him, unknown of
Zeus and the other gods, for Hera sent her. And she stood anigh and
spake to him winged words: “Rouse thee, son of Peleus, of all men most
redoubtable! Succour Patroklos, for whose body is terrible battle afoot
before the ships. There slay they one another, these guarding the dead
corpse, while the men of Troy are fierce to hale him unto windy Ilios,
and chiefliest noble Hector is fain to drag him, and his heart biddeth
him fix the head on the stakes of the wall when he hath sundered it
from the tender neck. But arise, lie thus no longer! let awe enter thy
heart to forbid that Patroklos become the sport of dogs of Troy. Thine
were the shame if he go down mangled amid the dead.”

Then answered her fleet-footed noble Achilles: “Goddess Iris, what god
sent thee a messenger unto me?”

And to him again spake wind-footed fleet Iris: “It was Hera that sent
me, the wise wife of Zeus, nor knoweth the high-throned son of Kronos
nor any other of the Immortals that on snowy Olympus have their
dwelling-place.”

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer to her and said: “And how may I
go into the fray? The Trojans hold my arms; and my dear mother bade me
forbear to array me until I behold her with my eyes returned, for she
promised to bring fair armour from Hephaistos. Other man know I none
whose noble armour I might put on, save it were the shield of Aias
Telamon’s son. But himself, I ween, is in the forefront of the press,
dealing death with his spear around Patroklos dead.”

Then again spake unto him wind-footed fleet Iris: “Well are we also
aware that thy noble armour is held from thee. But go forth unto the
trench as thou art and show thyself to the men of Troy, if haply they
will shrink back and refrain them from battle, and the warlike sons of
the Achaians take breath.”

Thus spake fleet-footed Iris and went her way. But Achilles dear to
Zeus arose, and around his strong shoulders Athene cast her tasselled
aegis, and around his head the bright goddess set a crown of a golden
cloud, and kindled therefrom a blazing flame. And as when a smoke
issueth from a city and riseth up into the upper air, from an island
afar off that foes beleaguer, while the others from their city fight
all day in hateful war,—but with the going down of the sun blaze out
the beacon-fires in line, and high aloft rusheth up the glare for
dwellers round about to behold, if haply they may come with ships to
help in need—thus from the head of Achilles soared that blaze toward
the heavens. And he went and stood beyond the wall beside the trench,
yet mingled not among the Achaians, for he minded the wise bidding of
his mother. There stood he and shouted aloud, and afar off Pallas
Athene uttered her voice, and spread terror unspeakable among the men
of Troy. Clear as the voice of a clarion when it soundeth by reason of
slaughterous foemen that beleaguer a city, so clear rang forth the
voice of Aiakides. And when they heard the brazen voice of Aiakides,
the souls of all of them were dismayed, and the horses of goodly manes
were fain to turn the chariots backward, for they boded anguish in
their hearts, And the charioteers were amazed when they saw the
unwearying fire blaze fierce on the head of the great-hearted son of
Peleus, for the bright-eyed goddess Athene made it blaze. Thrice from
over the trench shouted mightily noble Achilles, and thrice were the
men of Troy confounded and their proud allies. Yea there and then
perished twelve men of their best by their own chariot wheels and
spears. But the Achaians with joy drew Patroklos forth of the darts and
laid him on a litter, and his dear comrades stood around lamenting him;
and among them followed fleet-footed Achilles, shedding hot tears, for
his true comrade he saw lying on the bier, mangled by the keen bronze.
Him sent he forth with chariot and horses unto the battle, but home
again welcomed never more.

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen sent down the unwearying Sun to be gone
unwillingly unto the streams of Ocean. So the Sun set, and the noble
Achaians made pause from the stress of battle and the hazardous war.

But the Achaians all night made moan in lamentation for Patroklos. And
first of them in the loud lamentation was the son of Peleus, laying
upon the breast of his comrade his man-slaying hands and moaning very
sore, even as a deep-bearded lion whose whelps some stag-hunter hath
snatched away out of a deep wood; and the lion coming afterward
grieveth and through many glens he rangeth on the track of the
footsteps of the man, if anywhere he might find him, for most bitter
anger seizeth him;—thus Achilles moaning heavily spake among the
Myrmidons: “Ay me, vain verily was the word I uttered on that day when
I cheered the hero Menoitios in his halls and said that I would bring
back to Opoeis his son in glory from the sack of Ilios with the share
of spoil that should fall unto him. Not all the purposes of men doth
Zeus accomplish for them. It is appointed that both of us redden the
same earth with our blood here in Troy-land, for neither shall the old
knight Peleus welcome me back home within his halls, nor my mother
Thetis, but even here shall earth keep hold on me. Yet now, O
Patroklos, since I follow thee under earth, I will not hold thy funeral
till I have brought hither the armour and the head of Hector, thy
high-hearted slayer, and before thy pyre I will cut the throats of
twelve noble sons of the men of Troy, for mine anger thou art slain.
Till then beside the beaked ships shalt thou lie as thou art, and
around thee deep-bosomed women, Trojan and Dardanian, shall mourn thee
weeping night and day, even they whom we toiled to win by our strength
and, our long spears when we sacked rich cities of mortal men.”

Thus spake noble Achilles, and bade his comrades set a great tripod on
the fire, that with all speed they might wash from Patroklos the bloody
gore. So they set a tripod of ablution on the burning fire, and poured
therein water and took wood and kindled it beneath; and the fire
wrapped the belly of the tripod, and the water grew hot. And when the
water boiled in the bright bronze, then washed they him and anointed
with olive oil, and filled his wounds with fresh ointment, and laid him
on a bier and covered him with soft cloth from head to foot, and
thereover a white robe. Then all night around Achilles fleet of foot
the Myrmidons made lament and moan for Patroklos.

Meanwhile Zeus spake unto Hera his sister and wife: “Thou hast
accomplished this, O Hera, ox-eyed queen, thou hast aroused Achilles
fleet of foot. Verily of thine own children must the flowing-haired
Achaians be.”

Then answered unto him Hera the ox-eyed queen: “Most dread son of
Kronos, what is this word thou hast said? Truly even a man, I ween, is
to accomplish what he may for another man, albeit he is mortal and hath
not wisdom as we. How then was I who avow me the first of goddesses
both by birth and for that I am called thy wife, and thou art king
among all Immortals—how was I not in mine anger to devise evil against
the men of Troy?”

So debated they on this wise with one another. But Thetis of the silver
feet came unto the house of Hephaistos, imperishable, starlike, far
seen among the dwellings of Immortals, a house of bronze, wrought by
the crook-footed god himself. Him found she sweating in toil and busy
about his bellows, for he was forging tripods twenty in all to stand
around the wall of his stablished hall, and beneath the base of each he
had set golden wheels, that of their own motion they might enter the
assembly of the gods and again return unto his house, a marvel to look
upon. Thus much were they finished that not yet were away from the
fire, and gathered all his gear wherewith he worked into a silver
chest; and with a sponge he wiped his face and hands and sturdy neck
and shaggy breast, and did on his doublet, and took a stout staff and
went forth limping; but there were handmaidens of gold that moved to
help their lord, the semblances of living maids. In them is
understanding at their hearts, in them are voice and strength, and they
have skill of the immortal gods. These moved beneath their lord, and he
gat him haltingly near to where Thetis was, and set him on a bright
seat, and clasped her hand in his and spake and called her by her name:
“Wherefore, long-robed Thetis, comest thou to our house, honoured that
thou art and dear? No frequent comer art thou hitherto. Speak what thou
hast at heart; my soul is fain to accomplish it; if accomplish it I
can, and if it be appointed for accomplishment.”

Then answered unto him Thetis shedding tears: “Hephaistos, hath there
verily been any of all goddesses in Olympus that hath endured so many
grievous sorrows at heart as are the woes that Kronian Zeus hath laid
upon me above all others? He chose me from among the sisters of the sea
to enthrall me to a man, even Peleus Aiakos’ son, and with a man I
endured wedlock sore against my will. Now lieth he in his halls
forspent with grievous age, but other griefs are mine. A son he gave me
to bear and nourish, the chief of heroes, and he shot up like a young
branch. Like a plant in a very fruitful field I reared him and sent him
forth on beaked ships to Ilios to fight against the men of Troy, but
never again shall I welcome him back to his home within the house of
Peleus. And while he yet liveth in my sight and beholdeth the light of
the sun, he sorroweth, neither can I help him any whit though I go unto
him. The maiden whom the sons of the Achaians chose out to be his
prize, her hath the lord Agamemnon taken back out of his hands. In
grief for her wasted he his heart, while the men of Troy were driving
the Achaians on their ships, nor suffered them to come forth. And the
elders of the Argives entreated him, and told over many noble gifts.
Then albeit himself he refused to ward destruction from them, he put
his armour on Patroklos and sent him to the war, and much people with
him. All day they fought around the Skaian gates and that same day had
sacked the town, but that when now Menoitios’ valiant son had wrought
much harm, Apollo slew him in the forefront of the battle, and gave
glory unto Hector. Therefore now come I a suppliant unto thy knees, if
haply thou be willing to give my short-lived son shield and helmet, and
goodly greaves fitted with ankle-pieces, and cuirass. For the armour
that he had erst, his trusty comrade lost when he fell beneath the men
of Troy; and my son lieth on the earth with anguish in his soul.”

Then made answer unto her the lame god of great renown: “Be of good
courage, let not these things trouble thy heart. Would that so might I
avail to hide him far from dolorous death, when dread fate cometh upon
him, as surely shall goodly armour be at his need, such as all men
afterward shall marvel at, whatsoever may behold.”

Thus saying he left her there and went unto his bellows and turned them
upon the fire and bade them work. And the bellows, twenty in all, blew
on the crucibles, sending deft blasts on every side, now to aid his
labour and now anon howsoever Hephaistos willed and the work went on.
And he threw bronze that weareth not into the fire, and tin and
precious gold and silver, and next he set on an anvil-stand a great
anvil, and took in his hand a sturdy hammer, and in the other he took
the tongs.

First fashioned he a shield great and strong, adorning it all over, and
set thereto a shining rim, triple, bright-glancing, and therefrom a
silver baldric. Five were the folds of the shield itself; and therein
fashioned he much cunning work from his wise heart.

There wrought he the earth, and the heavens, and the sea, and the
unwearying sun, and the moon waxing to the full, and the signs every
one wherewith the heavens are crowned, Pleiads and Hyads and Orion’s
might, and the Bear that men call also the Wain, her that turneth in
her place and watcheth Orion, and alone hath no part in the baths of
Ocean.

Also he fashioned therein two fair cities of mortal men. In the one
were espousals and marriage feasts, and beneath the blaze of torches
they were leading the brides from their chambers through the city, and
loud arose the bridal song. And young men were whirling in the dance,
and among them flutes and viols sounded high; and women standing each
at her door were marvelling. But the folk were gathered in the assembly
place; for there a strife was arisen, two men striving about the
blood-price of a man slain; the one claimed to pay full atonement,
expounding to the people, but the other denied him and would take
naught. And the folk were cheering both, as they took part on either
side. And heralds kept order among the folk, while the elders on
polished stones were sitting in the sacred circle, and holding in their
hands staves from the loud-voiced heralds. Then before the people they
rose up and gave judgment each in turn. And in the midst lay two
talents of gold, to be given unto him who should plead among them most
righteously.

But around the other city were two armies in siege with glittering
arms. And two counsels found favour among them, either to sack the town
or to share all with the townsfolk even whatsoever substance the fair
city held within. But the besieged were not yet yielding, but arming
for an ambushment. On the wall there stood to guard it their dear wives
and infant children, and with these the old men; but the rest went
forth, and their leaders were Ares and Pallas Athene, both wrought in
gold, and golden was the vesture they had on. Goodly and great were
they in their armour, even as gods, far seen around, and the folk at
their feet were smaller. And when they came where it seemed good to
them to lay ambush, in a river bed where there was a common
watering-place of herds, there they set them, clad in glittering
bronze. And two scouts were posted by them afar off to spy the coming
of flocks and of oxen with crooked horns. And presently came the
cattle, and with them two herdsmen playing on pipes, that took no
thought of the guile. Then the others when they beheld these ran upon
them and quickly cut off the herds of oxen and fair flocks of white
sheep, and slew the shepherds withal. But the besiegers, as they sat
before the speech-places [from which the orators spoke] and heard much
din among the oxen, mounted forthwith behind their high-stepping
horses, and came up with speed. Then they arrayed their battle and
fought beside the river banks, and smote one another with bronze-shod
spears. And among them mingled Strife and Tumult, and fell Death,
grasping one man alive fresh-wounded, another without wound, and
dragging another dead through the mellay by the feet; and the raiment
on her shoulders was red with the blood of men. Like living mortals
they hurled together and fought, and haled the corpses each of the
other’s slain.

Furthermore he set in the shield a soft fresh-ploughed field, rich
tilth and wide, the third time ploughed; and many ploughers therein
drave their yokes to and fro as they wheeled about. Whensoever they
came to the boundary of the field and turned, then would a man come to
each and give into his hands a goblet of sweet wine, while others would
be turning back along the furrows, fain to reach the boundary of the
deep tilth. And the field grew black behind and seemed as it were
a-ploughing, albeit of gold, for this was the great marvel of the work.

Furthermore he set therein the demesne-land of a king, where hinds were
reaping with sharp sickles in their hands. Some armfuls along the
swathe were falling in rows to the earth, whilst others the
sheaf-binders were binding in twisted bands of straw. Three
sheaf-binders stood over them, while behind boys gathering corn and
bearing it in their arms gave it constantly to the binders; and among
them the king in silence was standing at the swathe with his staff,
rejoicing in his heart. And henchmen apart beneath an oak were making
ready a feast, and preparing a great ox they had sacrificed; while the
women were strewing much white barley to be a supper for the hinds.

Also he set therein a vineyard teeming plenteously with clusters,
wrought fair in gold; black were the grapes, but the vines hung
throughout on silver poles. And around it he ran a ditch of cyanus, and
round that a fence of tin; and one single pathway led to it, whereby
the vintagers might go when they should gather the vintage. And maidens
and striplings in childish glee bare the sweet fruit in plaited
baskets. And in the midst of them a boy made pleasant music on a
clear-toned viol, and sang thereto a sweet Linos-song [probably a
lament for departing summer] with delicate voice; while the rest with
feet falling together kept time with the music and song.

Also he wrought therein a herd of kine with upright horns, and the kine
were fashioned of gold and tin, and with lowing they hurried from the
byre to pasture beside a murmuring river, beside the waving reed. And
herdsmen of gold were following with the kine, four of them, and nine
dogs fleet of foot came after them. But two terrible lions among the
foremost kine had seized a loud-roaring bull that bellowed mightily as
they haled him, and the dogs and the young men sped after him. The
lions rending the great bull’s hide were devouring his vitals and his
black blood; while the herdsmen in vain tarred on their fleet dogs to
set on, for they shrank from biting the lions but stood hard by and
barked and swerved away.

Also the glorious lame god wrought therein a pasture in a fair glen, a
great pasture of white sheep, and a steading, and roofed huts, and
folds.

Also did the glorious lame god devise a dancing-place like unto that
which once in wide Knosos Daidalos wrought for Ariadne of the lovely
tresses. There were youths dancing and maidens of costly wooing, their
hands upon one another’s wrists. Fine linen the maidens had on, and the
youths well-woven doublets faintly glistening with oil. Fair wreaths
had the maidens, and the youths daggers of gold hanging from silver
baldrics. And now would they run round with deft feet exceeding
lightly, as when a potter sitting by his wheel that fitteth between his
hands maketh trial of it whether it run: and now anon they would run in
lines to meet each other. And a great company stood round the lovely
dance in joy; and through the midst of them, leading the measure, two
tumblers whirled.

Also he set therein the great might of the River of Ocean around the
uttermost rim of the cunningly-fashioned shield.

Now when he had wrought the shield great and strong, then wrought he
him a corslet brighter than a flame of fire, and he wrought him a
massive helmet to fit his brows, goodly and graven, and set thereon a
crest of gold, and he wrought him greaves of pliant tin.

So when the renowned lame god had finished all the armour, he took and
laid it before the mother of Achilles. Then she like a falcon sprang
down from snowy Olympus, bearing from Hephaistos the glittering arms.




BOOK XIX.


How Achilles and Agamemnon were reconciled before the assembly of the
Achaians, and Achilles went forth with them to battle.


Now Morning saffron-robed arose from the streams of Ocean to bring
light to gods and men, and Thetis came to the ships, bearing his gift
from the god. Her dear son she found fallen about Patroklos and
uttering loud lament; and round him many of his company made moan. And
the bright goddess stood beside him in their midst, and clasped her
hand in his and spake and called upon his name: “My child, him who
lieth here we must let be, for all our pain, for by the will of gods
from the beginning was he brought low. But thou take from Hephaistos
arms of pride, arms passing goodly, such as no man on his shoulders yet
hath borne.”

Thus spake the goddess and in front of Aehifies laid the arms, and they
rang all again in their glory. And awe fell on all the Myrmidons, nor
dared any to gaze thereon, for they were awe-stricken. But when
Achilles looked thereon, then came fury upon him the more, and his eyes
blazed terribly forth as it were a flame beneath their lids: glad was
he as he held in his hands that splendid gift of a god. But when he had
satisfied his soul in gazing on the glory of the arms, straightway to
his mother spake he winged words: “My mother, the arms the god has
given are such as it beseemeth that the work of Immortals should be,
and that no mortal man should have wrought. Now therefore will I arm me
in them, but I have grievous fear lest meantime on the gashed wounds of
Menoitios’ valiant son flies light and breed worms therein, and defile
his corpse—for the life is slain out of him—and so all his flesh shall
rot.”

Then answered him Thetis, goddess of the silver feet: “Child, have no
care for this within thy mind. I will see to ward from him the cruel
tribes of flies which prey on men slain in fight: for even though he
lie till a whole year’s course be run, yet his flesh shall be sound
continually, or better even than now. But call thou the Achaian
warriors to the place of assembly, and unsay thy wrath against
Agamemnon shepherd of the host, and then arm swiftly for battle, and
clothe thee with thy strength.”

Thus saying she filled him with adventurous might, while on Patroklos
she shed ambrosia and red nectar through his nostrils, that his flesh
might abide the same continually.

But noble Achilles went down the beach of the sea, crying his terrible
cry, and roused the Achaian warriors. And they who before were wont to
abide in the circle of the ships, and they who were helmsmen and kept
the steerage of the ships, or were stewards there and dealt out food,
even these came then to the place of assembly, because Achilles was
come forth, after long ceasing from grievous war. Limping came two of
Ares’ company, Tydeus’ son staunch in fight and noble Odysseus, each
leaning on his spear, for their wounds were grievous still; and they
went and sate them down in the forefront of the assembly. And last came
Agamemnon king of men, with his wound upon him, for him too in the
stress of battle Kooen Antenor’s son had wounded with his bronze-tipped
spear. But when all the Achaians were gathered, then uprose
fleet-footed Achilles and spake in their midst: “Son of Atreus, was
this in any wise the better way for both thee and me, what time with
grief at our hearts we waxed fierce in soul-devouring strife for the
sake of a girl? Would that Artemis had slain her with her arrow at the
ships, on the day whereon I took her to me, when I had spoiled
Lyrnessos; so should not then so many Achaians have bitten the wide
earth beneath their enemies’ hands, by reason of my exceeding wrath. It
hath been well for Hector and the Trojans, but the Achaians I think
shall long remember the strife that was betwixt thee and me. But
bygones will we let be, for all our pain, and curb under necessity the
spirit within our breasts. I now will stay my anger: it beseems me not
implacably for ever to be wroth; but come rouse speedily to the fight
the flowing-haired Achaians, that I may go forth against the men of
Troy and put them yet again to the proof, if they be fain to couch hard
by the ships. Methinks that some among them shall be glad to rest their
knees when they are fled out of the fierceness of the battle, and from
before our spear.”

He spake, and the well-greaved Achaians rejoiced that the great-hearted
son of Peleus had made renouncement of his wrath. Then among them spake
Agamemnon king of men, speaking from the place where he sat, not arisen
to stand forth in their midst: “O Danaan friends and heroes, men of
Ares’ company, seemly is it to listen to him who standeth up to speak,
nor behoveth it to break in upon his words: even toward a skilled man
that were hard. For amid the uproar of many men how should one listen,
or yet speak? even the clearest-voiced speech is marred. To the son of
Peleus I will declare myself, but ye other Argives give heed, and each
mark well my word. Oft have the Achaians spoken thus to me, and
upbraided me; but it is not I who am the cause, but Zeus and Destiny
and Erinys that walketh in the darkness, who put into my soul fierce
madness on the day when in the assembly I, even I, bereft Achilles of
his meed. What could I do? it is God who accomplisheth all. Eldest
daughter of Zeus is Ate who blindeth all, a power of bane: delicate are
her feet, for not upon the earth she goeth, but walketh over the heads
of men, making men fall; and entangleth this one or that. Ye even Zeus
was blinded upon a time, he who they say is greatest among gods and
men; yet even him Hera with a female wile deceived, on the day when
Alkmene in fair-crowned Thebes was to bring forth the strength of
Herakles. For then proclaimed he solemnly among the gods: ‘Here me ye
all, both gods and goddesses, while I utter the council of my soul
within my heart. This day shall Eileithuia, the help of travailing
women, bring to the light a man who shall be lord over all that dwell
round about, among the raise of men who are sprung of me by blood.’ And
to him in subtlety queen Hera spake: ‘Though wilt play the cheat and
not accomplish thy word. Come now, Olympian, swear me a firm oath that
verily and indeed shall that man be lord over all that dwell round
about, who this day shall fall between a woman’s feet, even he among
all men who are of the lineage of thy blood.’ So spake she, and Zeus no
wise perceived her subtlety but sware a mighty oath, and therewith was
he sore blinded. For Hera darted from Olympus’ peak and came swiftly to
Achaian Argus, were she knew was the stately wife of Sthenelos son of
Perseus, who was also great with child, and her seventh month had come.
Her son Hera brought to the light, though his tale of months was
untold, but she stayed Alkmene’s bearing and kept the Eileithuiai from
her aid. Then she brought the tidings herself and to Kronos’ son Zeus
she spake: ‘Father Zeus of the bright lightning, a word will I speak to
thee for my heed. Today is born a man of valor who shall rule among the
Archives, Eurystheus, son of Sthenelos the son of Perseus, of thy
lineage; not unmeet is it that he be lord among Argives.’ She said, but
sharp pain smote him in the depths of his soul, and straightway he
seized Ate by her bright-haired head in the anger of his soul, and
sware a mighty oath that never again to Olympus and the starry heaven
should Ate come, who blindeth all alike. He said, and whirling her in
his hand flung her from the starry heaven, and quickly came she down
among the works of men. Yet ever he groaned against her when he beheld
his beloved son in cruel travail at Eurystheus’ hest. Thus also I, what
time great Hector of the glancing helm was slaying Argives at the
sterns of our ships, could not be unmindful of Ate, who blinded me at
the first. But since thus blinded was I, and Zeus bereft me of my wit,
fain am I to make amends, and recompense manifold for the wrong. Only
arise thou to the battle and rouse the rest of the host. Gifts am I
ready to offer, even all that noble Odysseus went yesterday to promise
in thy hut. So, if thou wilt, stay awhile, though eager, from battle,
and squires shall take the gifts from my ship and carry them to thee,
that thou mayest see that what I give sufficeth thee.”

Then answered him Achilles swift of foot: “Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, for the gifts, to give them as it beseemeth, if
so thou wilt, or to withhold, is in thy choice. But now let us bethink
us of battle with all speed; this is no time to dally here with
subtleties, for a great work is yet undone. Once more must Achilles be
seen in the forefront of the battle, laying waste with his brazen spear
the battalions of the men of Troy. Thereof let each of you think as he
fighteth with his man.”

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him and said: “Nay yet, for all
thy valour, godlike Achilles, not against Ilios lead thou the sons of
Achaians fasting to fight the men of Troy, since not of short spell
shall the battle be, when once the ranks of men are met, and God shall
breathe valour into both. But bid the Achaians taste at the swift ships
food and wine; for thence is vigour and might. For no man fasting from
food shall be able to fight with the foe all day till the going down of
the sun; for though his spirit be eager for battle yet his limbs
unaware grow weary, and thirst besetteth him, and hunger, and his knees
in his going fail. But the man who having his fill of food and wine
fighteth thus all day against the enemy, his heart is of good cheer
within him, nor anywise tire his limbs, ere all give back from battle.
So come, disperse the host and bid them make ready their meal. And the
gifts let Agamemnon king of men bring forth into the midst of the
assembly, that all Achaians may behold them with their eyes, and thou
be glad at heart. And let him swear to thee an oath, standing in the
midst of the Argives, that he hath never gone up into the damsel’s bed
or lain with her, [O prince, as is the wont of man with woman]; and let
thine own spirit be placable within thy breast. Then let him make thee
a rich feast of reconcilement in his hut, that thou have nothing
lacking of thy right. And thou, son of Atreus, toward others also shalt
be more righteous hereafter; for no shame it is that a man that is a
king should make amends if he have been the first to deal violently.”

Then to him spake Agamemnon king of men: “Son of Laertes, I rejoice to
listen to thy speech; for rightfully hast thou told over all. And the
oath I am willing to swear, yea my heart biddeth it, nor will I
forswear myself before God. Let Achilles abide for a space, eager for
battle though he be, and all ye others abide together, until the gifts
come forth from my hut, and we make faithful oath with sacrifice. But
thee thyself I thus charge and bid. Choose thee young men, princes of
the Achaian folk, and bear my gifts from my ship, even all that we
promised yesterday to Achilles, and take with thee the women. And let
Talthybios speedily make me ready a boar-swine in the midst of the wide
Achaian host, to sacrifice to Zeus and to the Sun.”

And to him in answer swift-footed Achilles spake: “Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, at some other time were it even better
ye should be busied thus, when haply there shall be some pause of war,
and the spirit within my breast shall be less fierce. But now they lie
mangled on the field—even they whom Hector son of Priam slew, when Zeus
gave him glory—and ye call men to their food. Verily for my part I
would bid the sons of the Achaians to fight now unfed and fasting, and
with the setting sun make ready a mighty meal, when we shall have
avenged the shame. Till then down my throat at least nor food nor drink
shall go, since my comrade is dead, who in my hut is lying mangled by
the sharp spear, with his feet toward the door, and round him our
comrades mourn, wherefore in my heart to no thought of those matters,
but of slaying, and blood, and grievous moans of men.”

Then answered him Odysseus of many counsels: “O Achilles, Peleus’ son,
mightiest of Achaians far, better and mightier not a little art thou
than I with the spear, but in counsel I may surpass thee greatly, since
I was born first and know more things: wherefore let thy heart endure
to listen to my speech. Quickly have men surfeit of battle, of that
wherein the sword streweth most straw yet is the harvest scantiest,
[i.e., in a pitched battle there is little plunder, the hope of which
might help to sustain men’s efforts in storming a town] when Zeus
inclineth his balance, who is disposer of the wars of men. But it
cannot be that the Achaians fast to mourn a corpse; for exceeding many
and thick fall such on every day; when then should there be rest from
toil? Nay, it behoveth to bury him who is dead, steeling our hearts,
when once we have wept him for a day; but such as are left alive from
hateful war must take thought of meat and drink, that yet more against
our foes we may fight relentlessly ever, clad in unyielding bronze.
Then let none of the host hold back awaiting other summons; this is the
summons, and ill shall it be for whoso is left behind at the Argive
ships; but all together as one we will rouse against the horse-taming
Trojans the fury of war.”

He spoke, and took with him the sons of noble Nestor, and Meges son of
Phyleus, and Thoas, and Meriones, and Lykomedes son of Kreiontes, and
Melanippos. And they went on their way to the hut of Agamemnon, Atreus’
son. Forthwith as the word was spoken so was the deed done. Seven
tripods they bare from the hut, as he promised him, and twenty bright
caldrons, and twelve horses, and anon they led forth women skilled in
goodly arts, seven, and the eighth was fair-faced Briseis. Then
Odysseus, having weighed ten talents of gold in all, led the way, and
with him young men of the Achaians bare the gifts. These they set in
the midst of the place of assembly, and Agamemnon rose up, and beside
that shepherd of the host stood Talthybios, whose voice was like a
god’s, and held a boar between his hands. And the son of Atreus drawing
with his hands his knife, which ever hung beside the mighty scabbard of
his sword, cut off the first hairs from the boar, and lifting up his
hands he prayed to Zeus, and all the Argives sat silent in their
places, duly hearkening to the king. And he prayed aloud, looking up to
the wide heaven: “Be Zeus before all witness, highest and best of the
gods, and Earth, and Sun, and Erinyes, who under earth take vengeance
upon men, whosoever for-sweareth himself, that never have I laid hand
on the damsel Briseis, neither to lie with her nor anywise else, but
she has abode untouched within my huts. And if aught that I swear be
false, may the gods give me all sorrows manifold, that they send on him
who sinneth against them in his oath.”

He said, and cut the boar’s throat with the pitiless knife. And the
body Taithybios whirled and threw into the great wash of the hoary sea,
to be the food of fishes; but Achilles arose up and spake in the midst
of the warrior Argives: “Father Zeus, sore madness dealest thou verily
to men. Never could the son of Atreus have stirred the soul within my
breast, nor led off the damsel implacably against my will, had not Zeus
willed that on many of the Achaians death should come. But now go forth
to your meal, that we may join battle thereupon.”

Thus he spake and dispersed the assembly with all speed. The rest were
scattered each to his own ship, but the great-hearted Myrmidons took up
the gifts, and bare them to the ship of godlike Achilles. And they laid
them in the huts and set the women there, and gallant squires drave the
horses among their troop.

But Briseis that was like unto golden Aphrodite, when she beheld
Patroklos mangled by the keen spear, fell about him and made shrill
lament, and tore with her hands her breast and tender neck, and
beautiful face. And she spake amid her weeping, that woman like unto
goddesses: “Patroklos, dearest to my hapless heart, alive I left thee
when I left this hut, but now, O prince of the people, I am come back
to find thee dead; thus evil ever followeth evil in my lot. My husband,
unto whom my father and lady mother gave me, I beheld before our city
mangled with the keen spear, and my three brothers whom my own mother
bore, my near and dear, who all met their day of doom. But thou, when
swift Achilles slew my husband and wasted godlike Mynes’ city, wouldest
ever that I should not even weep, and saidest that thou wouldst make me
godlike Achilles’ wedded wife, and that ye would take me in your ships
to Phthia and make me a marriage feast among the Myrmidons. Therefore
with all my soul I mourn thy death, for thou wert ever kind.”

Thus spake she weeping, and thereon the women wailed, in semblance for
Patroklos, but each for her own woe. But round Achilles gathered the
elders of the Achaians, praying him that he would eat; but he denied
them with a groan: “I pray you, if any kind comrade will hearken to me,
bid me not sate my heart with meat and drink, since terrible grief is
come upon me. Till the sun go down I will abide, and endure continually
until then.”

He spoke, and his speech made the other chiefs depart, but the two sons
of Atreus stayed, and noble Odysseus, and Nestor and Idomeneus and
Phoinox, ancient knight, soothing him in his exceeding sorrow, but he
could no whit be soothed until he had entered the mouth of bloody war.
And bethinking him he sighed very heavily and spake aloud: “Thou too, O
hapless, dearest of my friends, thyself wouldst verily of yore set
forth in out hut with ready speed a savoury meal, what time the
Achaians hasted to wage against the horse-taming Trojans dolorous war.
But now thou liest mangled, and my heart will none of meat and drink,
that stand within, for desire of thee. Nought worse than this could I
endure, not though I should hear of my father’s death, who now I ween
in Phthia is shedding big tears for lack of a son so dear, even me that
in an alien land for sake of baleful Helen do battle with the men of
Troy; nor though it were my beloved son who is reared for me in Skyros
(if still at least is godlike Neoptolemos alive). For hitherto had my
soul within me trusted that I alone should perish far from
horse-pasturing Argos, here in the Trojan land, but that thou shouldest
return to Phthia, so that thou mightest take me the child in thy swift
black ship from Skyros and show him everything—my substance and
servants, and high-roofed mighty hall. For Peleus I ween already must
be dead and gone, or else in feeble life he hath sorrow of age, and of
waiting ever for bitter news of me, till he hear that I am dead.”

Thus spake he weeping, and the elders mourned with him, bethinking them
what each had left at home. And when the son of Kronos beheld them
sorrowing he pitied them, and forthwith to Athene spake he winged
words: “My child, thou hast then left utterly the man of thy heart.
Hath Achilles then no longer a place within thy thought? He before the
steep-prowed ships sits mourning his dear comrade; the rest are gone to
their meal, but he is fasting and unfed. But go, distil into his breast
nectar and pleasant ambrosia, that no pains of hunger come on him.”

Thus saying he sped forward Athene who before was fain. And she, like a
falcon wide-winged and shrill-voiced, hurled herself forth from heaven
through the upper air. So while the Achaians were arming presently
throughout the camp, she in Achilles’ breast distilled nectar and
pleasant ambrosia, that grievous hunger might not assail his knees, and
then herself was gone to the firm house of her mighty father. Then the
Achaians poured forth from the swift ships. As when thick snowflakes
flutter down from Zeus, chill beneath the blast of Boreas born in the
upper air, so thick from the ships streamed forth bright glittering
helms and bossy shields, strong-plaited cuirasses and ashen spears. And
the sheen thereof went up to heaven and all the earth around laughed in
the flash of bronze, and there went a sound beneath the feet of the
men, and in the midst of them noble Achilles harnessed him. His teeth
gnashed together, and his eyes blazed as it were the flame of a fire,
for into his heart was intolerable anguish entered in. Thus wroth
against the men of Troy he put on the gift of the god, which Hephaistos
wrought him by his art. First on his legs he set the fair greaves
fitted with silver ankle-pieces, and next he donned the cuirass about
his breast. Then round his shoulders he slung the bronze sword
silver-studded; then lastly he took the great and strong shield, and
its brightness shone afar off as the moon’s. Or as when over the sea
there appeareth to sailors the brightness of a burning fire, and it
burneth on high among the mountains in some lonely steading—sailors
whom storm-blasts bear unwilling over the sea, the home of fishes, afar
from them they love:— so from Achilles’ goodly well-dight shield the
brightness thereof shot up toward heaven. And he lifted the stout
helmet and set it on his head, and like a star it shone, the horse-hair
crested helmet, and around it waved plumes of gold that Hephaistos had
set thick about the crest. Then noble Achilles proved him in his armour
to know whether it fitted unto him, and whether his glorious limbs ran
free; and it became to him as it were wings, and buoyed up the shepherd
of hosts.

And forth from its stand he drew his father’s spear, heavy and great
and strong: that spear could none other of the Achaians wield, but
Achilles alone awaited to wield it, the Pelian ashen spear that Cheiron
gave to his father dear, from a peak of Pelion, to be the death of
warriors. And Automedon and Alkimos went about to yoke the horses, and
put on them fair breast-straps, and bits within their jaws, and
stretched the reins behind to the firm-built chariot. Then Automedon
took the bright lash, fitted to his hand, and sprang up behind the
horses, and after him mounted Achilles armed, effulgent in his armour
like bright Hyperion. And terribly he called upon the horses of his
sire: “Xanthos and Balios, famed children of Podarge, in other sort
take heed to bring your charioteer safe back to the Danaan host, when
we have done with battle, and leave him not as ye left Patroklos to lie
there dead.”

Then the horse Xanthos of glancing feet made answer unto him from
beneath the yoke;—and he bowed with his head, and all his mane fell
from the yoke-cushion beside the yoke and touched the ground;—for the
white-armed goddess Hera gave him speech: “Yea verily for this hour,
dread Achilles, we will still bear thee safe, yet is thy death day nigh
at hand, neither shall we be cause thereof, but a mighty god, and
forceful Fate. For not through sloth or heedlessness of ours did the
men of Troy from Patrokios’ shoulders strip his arms, but the best of
the gods, whom bright-haired Leto bore, slew him in the forefront of
the battle, and to Hector gave renown. We even with the wind of Zephyr,
swiftest, they say, of all winds, well might run; nathless to thee
thyself it is appointed to be slain in fight by a god and by a man.”

Now when he had thus spoken the Erinyes stayed his voice. And sore
troubled did fleet-footed Achilles answer him: “Xanthos, why
prophesiest thou my death? no wise behoveth it thee. Well know I of
myself that it is appointed me to perish here, far from my father dear
and mother; howbeit anywise I will not refrain till I give the Trojans
surfeit of war.”

He said, and with a cry among the foremost held on his whole-hooved
steeds.




BOOK XX.


How Achilles made havoc among the men of Troy.


So by the beaked ships around thee, son of Peleus, hungry for war, the
Achaians armed; and over against them the men of Troy, upon the high
ground of the plain.

But Zeus bade Themis call the gods to council from many-folded Olympus’
brow; and she ranged all about and bade them to the house of Zeus.
There was no River came not up, save only Ocean, nor any nymph, of all
that haunt fair thickets and springs of rivers and grassy
water-meadows. And they came to the house of Zeus who gathereth the
clouds, and sat them down in the polished colonnades which Hephaistos
in the cunning of his heart had wrought for father Zeus.

Thus gathered they within the doors of Zeus; nor was the Earthshaker
heedless of the goddess’ call, but from the salt sea came up after the
rest, and set him in the midst, and inquired concerning the purpose of
Zeus: “Wherefore, O Lord of the bright lightning, hast thou called the
gods again to council? Say, ponderest thou somewhat concerning the
Trojans and Achaians? for lo, the war and the fighting of them are
kindled very nigh.”

And Zeus, who gathered the clouds, answered him, saying: “Thou knowest,
O Earthshaker, the purpose within my breast, wherefor I gathered you
hither; even in their perishing have I regard unto them. But for me I
will abide here, sitting within a fold of Olympus, where I will gladden
my heart with gazing; but go all ye forth that ye come among the
Trojans and Achaians and succour these or those, howsoever each of you
hath a mind. For if Achilles alone shall fight against the Trojans, not
even a little while shall they hold back the son of Peleus, the fleet
of foot. Nay, but even aforetime they trembled when they looked upon
him; now therefore that his wrath for his friend is waxen terrible I
fear me lest he overleap the bound of fate, and storm the wall.”

Thus spake the son of Kronos, and roused unabating war. For on this
side and on that the gods went forth to war: to the company of the
ships went Hera, and Pallas Athene, and Poseidon, Earth-enfolder, and
the Helper Hermes, pro-eminent in subtle thoughts; and with these went
Hephaistos in the greatness of his strength, halting, but his shrunk
legs moved nimbly under him: but to the Trojans went Ares of the
glancing helm, and with him Phoebus of the unshorn hair, and archer
Artemis, and Leto and Xanthos and laughter-loving Aphrodite.

Now for so long as gods were afar from mortal men, so long waxed the
Achaians glorious, for that Achilles was come forth among them, and his
long ceasing from grim battle was at an end. And the Trojans were
smitten with sore trembling in the limbs of every one of them, in
terror when they beheld the son of Peleus, fleet of foot, blazing in
his arms, peer of man-slaying Ares. But when among the mellay of men
the Olympians were come down, then leapt up in her might Strife, rouser
of hosts, then sent forth Athene a cry, now standing by the hollowed
trench without the wall, and now on the echoing shores she shouted
aloud. And a shout uttered Ares against her, terrible as the blackness
of the storm, now from the height of the city to the Trojans calling
clear, or again along Simois shore over Kallikolon he sped.

So urged the blessed gods both hosts to battle, then themselves burst
into fierce war. And terribly thundered the father of gods and men from
heaven above; and from beneath Poseidon made the vast earth shake and
the steep mountain tops. Then trembled all the spurs of many-fountained
Ida, and all her crests, and the city of the Trojans, and the ships of
the Achaians. And the Lord of the Underworld, Aiedoneus, had terror in
hell, and leapt from his throne in that terror and cried aloud, lest
the world be cloven above him by Poseidon, Shaker of earth, and his
dwelling-place be laid bare to mortals and immortals—grim halls, and
vast, and lothly to the gods. So loud the roar rose of that battle of
gods. For against King Poseidon stood Phoebus Apollo with his winged
arrows, and against Enyalios stood Athene, bright-eyed goddess, and
against Hera she of the golden shafts and echoing chase, even archer
Artemis, sister of the Far-darter; and against Leto the strong Helper
Hermes, and against Hephaistos the great deep-eddying River, whom gods
call Xanthos and men Skamandros.

Thus gods with gods were matched. Meanwhile Achilles yearned above all
to meet Hector, son of Priam, in the fray; for with that blood
chiefliest his spirit bade him sate Ares, stubborn lord of war. But
straightway Apollo, rouser of hosts, moved Aineias to go to meet the
son of Peleus, and filled him with brave spirit: and he made his own
voice like the voice of Lykaon the son of Priam; in his semblance spake
Apollo, son of Zeus: “Aineias, counsellor of Trojans, where now are thy
threats wherewith thou didst boast to the Trojan lords over thy wine,
saying thou wouldest stand up in battle against Achilles, Peleus’ son?”

And to him Aineias answered and said: “Son of Priam, why biddest thou
me thus face the fierce son of Peleus in battle, though I be not fain
thereto? Not for the first time now shall I match me with Achilles,
fleet of foot; once before drave he me with his spear from Ida, when he
harried our kine and wasted Lyrnessos and Pedasos; but Zeus delivered
me out of his hand and put strength into my knees that they were swift.
Else had I fallen beneath the hands of Achilles, and of Athene who went
before and gave him light, and urged him to slay Leleges and Trojans
with his spear of bronze. Therefore it is impossible for man to face
Achilles in fight, for that ever some god is at his side to ward off
death. Ay, and at any time his spear flieth straight, neither ceaseth
till it have pierced through flesh of man. But if God once give us fair
field of battle, not lightly shall he overcome me, not though he boast
him made of bronze throughout.”

And to him in answer spake Apollo son of Zeus: “Yea, hero, pray thou
too to the everliving gods; for thou too, men say, wast born of
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus, and Achilles’ mother is of less degree
among the gods. For thy mother is child of Zeus, his but of the Ancient
One of the Sea. Come, bear up thy unwearying spear against him, let him
no wise turn thee back with revilings and bitter words.”

He said, and breathed high spirit into the shepherd of the host, and he
went onward through the forefront of the fighting, harnessed in
flashing bronze. But white-armed Hera failed not to discern Anchises’
son as he went through the press of men to meet the son of Peleus, and
gathering the gods about her she spake among them thus: “Consider ye
twain, Poseidon and Athene, within your hearts, what shall come of
these things that are done. Here is Aineias gone forth harnessed in
flashing bronze, to meet the son of Peleus, and it is Phoebus Apollo
that hath sent him. Come then, be it ours to turn him back straightway;
or else let some one of us stand likewise beside Achilles and give him
mighty power, so that he fail not in his spirit, but know that they who
love him are the best of the Immortals, and that they who from of old
ward war and fighting from the Trojans are vain as wind. All we from
Olympus are come down to mingle in this fight that he take no hurt
among the Trojans on this day—afterward he shall suffer whatsoever
things Fate span for him with her thread, at his beginning, when his
mother bare him. If Achilles learn not this from voice divine, then
shall he be afraid when some god shall come against him in the battle;
for gods revealed are hard to look upon.”

Then to her made answer Poseidon, Shaker of the earth: “Hera, be not
fierce beyond wisdom; it behoveth thee not. Not fain am I at least to
match gods with gods in strife. Let us go now into some high place
apart and seat us there to watch, and battle shall be left to men. Only
if Ares or Phoebus Apollo fall to fighting, or put constraint upon
Achilles and hinder him from fight, then straightway among us too shall
go up the battle-cry of strife; right soon, methinks, shall they hie
them from the issue of the fray back to Olympus to the company of the
gods, overcome by the force of our hands.”

Thus spake the blue-haired god, and led the way to the mounded wall of
heaven-sprung Herakles, that lofty wall built him by the Trojans and
Pallas Athene, that he might escape the monster and be safe from him,
what time he should make his onset from the beach to the plain. There
sate them down Poseidon and the other gods, and clothed their shoulders
with impenetrable cloud. And they of the other part sat down on the
brows of Kallikolon around thee, Archer Phoebus, and Ares waster of
cities. Thus they on either side sat devising counsels, but shrank all
from falling to grievous war, and Zeus from his high seat commanded
them.

Meanwhile the whole plain was filled with men and horses and ablaze
with bronze; and the earth rang with the feet of them as they rushed
together in the fray. Two men far better than the rest were meeting in
the midst between the hosts, eager for battle, Aineias, Anchises’ son,
and noble Achilles. First came on Aineias threateningly, tossing his
strong helm; his rapid shield he held before his breast, and brandished
his bronze spear. And on the other side the son of Peleus rushed to
meet him like a lion, a ravaging lion whom men desire to slay, a whole
tribe assembled: and first he goeth his way unheeding, but when some
warrior youth hath smitten him with a spear, the he gathereth himself
open-mouthed, and foam cometh forth about his teeth, and his stout
spirit groaneth in his heart, and with his tail he scourgeth either
side his ribs and flanks and goadeth himself on to fight, and glaring
is borne straight on them by his passion, to try whether he shall slay
some man of them, or whether himself shall perish in the forefront of
the throng: thus was Achilles driven of his passion and valiant spirit
to go forth to meet Aineias great of heart. And when they were come
near against each other, then first to Aineias spake fleet-footed noble
Achilles: “Aineias, wherefore hast thou so far come forward from the
crowd to stand against me: doth thy heart bid thee fight with me in
hope of holding Priam’s honour and lordship among the horse-taming
Trojans? Nay, though thou slay me, not for that will Priam lay his
kingdom in thy hands, for he hath sons, and is sound and of unshaken
mind. Or have the Trojans allotted thee some lot of ground more choice
than all the rest, fair land of tilth and orchard, that thou mayest
dwell therein, if thou slay me? But methinks thou wilt find the slaying
hard; for once before, I ween, have I made thee flee before my spear.
Host thou forgotten the day when thou wert alone with the kine, and I
made thee run swift-footed down Ida’s steeps in haste?—then didst thou
not look behind thee in thy flight. Thence fleddest thou to Lernessos,
but I wasted it, having fought against it with the help of Athene and
of father Zeus, and carried away women captive, bereaving them of their
day of freedom: only thee Zeus shielded, and other gods. But not this
time, methinks, shall they shield thee, as thou imaginest in thy heart:
therefore I bid thee go back into the throng and come not forth against
me, while as yet thou art unhurt—after the event even a fool is wise.”

Then to him in answer again Aineias spake: “Son of Peleus, think not
with words to affright me as a child, since I too well know myself how
to speak taunts and unjust speech. We know each other’s race and
lineage in that we have heard the fame proclaimed by mortal men, but
never hast thou set eyes on my parents, or I on thine. Thou, they say,
art son of nobie Peleus, and of Thetis of the fair tresses, the
daughter of the sea: the sire I boast is Anchises great of heart, and
my mother is Aphrodite. Of these shall one pair or the other mourn
their dear son today; for verily not with idle words shall we two
satisfy our strife and depart out of the battle. But, if thou wilt,
learn also this, that thou mayest well know our lineage, known to full
many men: First Zeus the cloud-gatherer begat Dardanos, and he
stablished Dardania, for not yet was holy Ilios built upon the plain to
be a city of mortal men, but still they dwelt on slopes of
many-fountained Ida. Then Dardanos begat a son, king Erichthonios, who
became richest of mortal men. Three thousand mares had he that pastured
along the marsh meadow, rejoicing in their tender foals. Of them was
Boreas enamoured as they grazed, and in semblance of a dark-maned horse
he covered them: then they having conceived bare twelve fillies. These
when they bounded over Earth the grain-giver would run upon the topmost
ripened ears of corn and break them not; and when they bounded over the
broad backs of the sea they would run upon the crests of the breakers
of the hoary brine. Then Erichthonios begat Tros to be load over the
Trojans, and to Tros three noble sons were born, Ilos and Assarakos and
godlike Ganymedes, who became the most beautiful of mortal men. Him the
gods caught up to be cupbearer to Zeus, for sake of his beauty, that he
might dwell among immortals. Then Ilos again begat a son, noble
Laomedon, and Laomedon begat Tithonos and Priam and Lamppos and Klytios
and Hiketaon, of the stock of Ares. And Assarakos begat Kapys, and
Kapys Anchises, and Anchises me; but Priam begat the goodly Hector.

“Lo then of this blood and lineage declare I myself unto thee. But for
valour, Zeus increaseth it in men or minisheth it according as he will,
for he is lord of all. But come, let us talk thus together no longer
like children, standing in mid onset of war. For there are revilings in
plenty for both of us to utter—a hundred-thwarted ship would not
suffice for the load of them. Glib is the tongue of man, and many words
are therein of every kind, and wide is the range of his speech hither
and thither. Whatsoever word thou speak, such wilt thou hear in answer.
But what need that we should bandy strife and wrangling each against
each. Not by speech shalt thou turn me from the battle that I desire,
until we have fought together, point to point: come then, and
straightway we will each try the other with bronze-headed spears.”

He said, and against that other’s dread and mighty shield hurled his
great spear, and the shield rang loud beneath the spear-point. And the
son of Peleus held away the shield from him with his stout hand, in
fear, for he thought that the far-shadowing spear of Aineias great of
heart would lightly pierce it through—fond man, and knew not in his
mind and heart that not lightly do the glorious gifts of gods yield to
force of mortal men. So did not the great spear of wise Aineias pierce
that shield, for the gold resisted it, even the gift of the god. Yet
through two folds he drave it, but three remained, for five folds had
the lame god welded, two bronze, and two inside of tin, and one of
gold; therein was stayed the ashen spear.

Then Achilles in his turn hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote
upon the circle of the shield of Aineias, beneath the edge of the rim,
where the bronze ran thinnest round, and the bull-hide was thinnest
thereon; and right through sped the Pelian ashen spear, and the shield
cracked under it. And Aineias crouched and held up the shield away from
him in dread; and the spear flew over his back and fixed itself in the
earth, having divided asunder the two circles of the sheltering shield.
And having escaped the long spear he stood still, and a vast anguish
drowned his eyes, affrighted that the spear was planted by him so nigh.
But Achilles drew his sharp sword and furiously made at him, crying his
terrible cry: then Aineias grasped in his hand a stone (a mighty deed)
such as two men, as men now are, would not avail to lift, but he with
ease wielded it all alone. Then would Aineias have smitten him with the
stone as he charged, either on helm or shield, which had warded from
him bitter death, and then would the son of Peleus have closed and
slain him with his sword, had not Poseidon, Shaker of earth, marked it
with speed, and straightway spoken among the immortal gods: “Alas, woe
is me for Aineias great of heart, who quickly will go down to Hades
slain by the son of Peleus, for that he will obey the words of Apollo
the far-darter, fond man, but nowise shall the god help him from
grievous death. But wherefore now is he to suffer ill in his innocence,
causelessly for others’ wickedness, yet welcome ever are his offerings
to the gods who inhabit the spacious heaven? Come, let us guide him out
of death’s way, lest the son of Kronos be wroth, if Achilles slay him;
for it is appointed to him to escape, that the race of Dardanos perish
not without seed or sign, even Dardanos whom the son of Kronos loved
above all the children born to him from the daughters of men. For the
race of Priam hath Zeus already hated. But thus shall the might of
Aineias reign among the Trojans, and his children’s children, who shall
be born in the aftertime.”

And him then answered Hera the ox-eyed queen: “Shaker of earth, thyself
with thine own mind take counsel, whether thou wilt save Aineias, or
leave him [to be slain, brave though he be, by Achilles, Peleus’ son].
For by many oaths among all the Immortals have we two sworn, even
Pallas Athene and I, never to help the Trojans from their evil day, not
even when all Troy shall burn in the burning of fierce fire, and they
that burn her shall be the warlike sons of the Achaians.”

Now when Poseidon Shaker of earth heard that, he went up amid the
battle and the clash of spears, and came where Aineias and renowned
Achilles were. Then presently he shed mist over the eyes of Achilles,
Peleus’ son, and drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of
Aineias great of heart, and set it before Achilles’ feet, and lifted
Aineias and swung him high from off the earth. Over many ranks of
warriors, of horses many, sprang Aineias soaring in the hand of the
god, and lighted at the farthest verge of the battle of many onsets,
where the Kaukones were arraying them for the fight. Then hard beside
him came Poseidon, Shaker of earth, and spake aloud to him winged
words: “Aineias, what god is it that biddeth thee fight infatuate
against Peleus’ vehement son, who is both a better man than thou and
dearer to Immortals? Rather withdraw thee whensoever thou fallest in
with him, lest even contrary to thy fate thou enter the house of Hades.
But when Achilles shall have met his death and doom, then be thou of
good courage to fight among the foremost, for there shall none other of
the Achaians slay thee.”

He spoke, and left him there, when he had shown him all these things.
Then quickly from Achilles’ eyes he purged the magic mist; and he
stared with wide eyes, and in trouble spake unto his proud soul: “Ha!
verily a great marvel behold I here with mine eyes. My spear lieth here
upon the ground, nor can I anywise see the man at whom I hurled it with
intent to slay him. Truly then is Aineias likewise dear to the immortal
gods, howbeit I deemed that his boosting thereof was altogether vanity.
Away with him! not again will he find heart to make trial of me, now
that once more he has escaped death to his joy. But come, I will call
on the warlike Danaans and go forth to make trial of some other Trojan
face to face.”

He said, and leapt along the lines, and called upon each man: “No
longer stand afar from the men of Troy, noble Achaians, but come let
man match man and throw his soul into the fight. Hard is it for me,
though I be strong, to assail so vast a folk and fight them all: not
even Ares, though an immortal god, nor Athene, could plunge into the
jaws of such a fray and toil therein. But to my utmost power with hands
and feet and strength no whit, I say, will I be slack, nay, never so
little, but right through their line will I go forward, nor deem I that
any Trojan shall be glad who shall come nigh my spear.”

Thus spake he urging them. But to the Trojans glorious Hector called
aloud, and proclaimed that he would go forth against Achilles:
“High-hearted Trojans, fear not Peleus’ son. I too in words could fight
even Immortals, but with the spear it were hard, for they are stronger
far. Neither shall Achilles accomplish all his talk, but part thereof
he is to accomplish, and part to break asunder in the midst. And
against him will I go forth, though the hands of him be even as fire,
yea though his hands be as fire and his fierceness as the flaming
steel.”

Thus spake he urging them, and the Trojans raised their spears for
battle; and their fierceness was mingled confusedly, and the battle-cry
arose. Then Phoebus Apollo stood by Hector and spake to him: “Hector,
no longer challenge Achilles at all before the lines, but in the throng
await him and from amid the roar of the battle, lest haply he spear
thee or come near and smite thee with his sword.”

Thus spake he, and Hector again fell back into the crowd of men, for he
was amazed when he heard the sound of a god’s voice.

But Achilles sprang in among the Trojans, his heart clothed with
strength, crying his terrible cry, and first he took Iphition,
Otrynteus’ valiant son, a leader of much people, born of a Naiad nymph
to Otrynteus waster of cities, beneath snowy Tmolos, in Hyde’s rich
domain. Him as he came right on did goodly Achilles smite with his
hurled spear, down through the midst of his head, and it was rent
asunder utterly. And he fell with a crash, and goodly Achilles exulted
over him; “here is thy death, thy birth was on the Gygaian lake, where
is thy sire’s demesne, by Hyllos rich in fish and eddying Hermos.”

Thus spake he exultant, but darkness fell upon the eyes of Iphition:
him the chariots of the Achaians clave with their tires asunder in the
forefront of the battle, and over him Achilles pierced in the temples,
through his bronze-cheeked helmet, Demoleon, brave stemmer of battle,
Antenor’s son. No stop made the bronze helmet, but therethrough sped
the spear-head and clave the bone, and the brain within was all
scattered: that stroke made ending of his zeal. Then Hippodamas, as he
leapt from his chariot and fled before him, Achilles wounded in the
back with his spear: and he breathed forth his spirit with a roar, as
when a dragged bull roareth that the young men drag to the altar of the
Lord of Helike; for in such hath the Earthshaker his delight: thus
roared Hippodamas as from his bones fled forth his haughty spirit. But
Achilles with his spear went on after godlike Polydoros, Priam’s son.
Him would his sire continually forbid to fight, for that among his
children he was youngest born and best beloved, and overcame all in
fleetness of foot. Just then in boyish folly, displaying the swiftness
of his feet, he was rushing through the forefighters, until he lost his
life. Him in the midst did fleet-footed noble Achilles smite with a
javelin, in his back as he darted by, where his belt’s golden buckles
clasped, and the breast and back plates overlapped: and right through
beside the navel went the spear-head, and he fell on his knee with a
cry, and dark cloud covered him round about, and he clasped his bowels
to him with his hands as he sank.

Then when Hector saw his brother Polydoros clasping his bowels with his
hands, and sinking to the earth, a mist fell over his eyes, nor longer
might he endure to range so far apart, but he came up against Achilles
brandishing his sharp spear, and like flame of fire. And Achilles when
he saw him, sprang up, and spake exultingly: “Behold the man who hath
deepest stricken into my soul, who slew my dear-prized friend; not long
shall we now shrink from each other along the highways of the war.”

He said, and looking grimly spake unto goodly Hector: “Come thou near,
that the sooner thou mayest arrive at the goal of death.”

Then to him, unterrified, said Hector of the glancing helm: “Son of
Peleus, think not with words to affright me as a child, since I too
know myself how to speak taunts and unjust speech. And I know that thou
art a man of might, and a far better man than I. Yet doth this issue
lie in the lap of the gods, whether I though weaker shall take thy life
with my hurled spear, for mine too hath been found keen ere now.”

He said, and poised his spear and hurled it, and Athene with a breath
turned it back from glorious Achilles, breathing very lightly; and it
came back to goodly Hector, and fell there before his feet. Then
Achilles set fiercely upon him, eager to slay him, crying his terrible
cry. But Apollo caught Hector up, very easily, as a god may, and hid
him in thick mist. Thrice then did fleet-footed noble Achilles make
onset with his spear of bronze, and thrice smote the thick mist. [But
when the fourth time he had come godlike on,] then with dread shout he
spake to him winged words: “Dog, thou art now again escaped from death;
yet came ill very nigh thee; but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to
whom thou must surely pray when thou goest forth amid the clash of
spears. Verily I will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any
god is helper of me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I
may seize.”

Thus speaking he pierced Dryops in the midst of his neck with his
spear, and he fell down before his feet. But he left him where he lay,
and hurled at Demuchos Philetor’s son, a good man and a tall, and
stayed him with a stroke upon his knees; then smote him with his mighty
sword and reft him of life. Then springing on Laogonos and Dardanos,
sons of Bias, he thrust both from their chariot to the ground, one with
a spear-cast smiting and the other in close battle with his sword. Then
Tros, Alastor’s son—he came and clasped his knees to pray him to spare
him, and let him live, and slay him not, having compassion on his like
age, fond fool, and knew not that he might not gain his prayers; for
nowise soft of heart or tender was that man, but of fierce mood—with
his hands he touched Achilles’ knees, eager to entreat him, but he
smote him in the liver with his sword, and his liver fell from him, and
black blood therefrom filled his bosom, and he swooned, and darkness
covered his eyes. Then Achilles came near and struck Mulios in the ear,
and right through the other ear went the bronze spear-head. Then he
smote Agenor’s son Echeklos on the midst of the head with his hilted
sword, and all the sword grew hot thereat with blood; and dark death
seized his eyes, and forceful fate. Then next Deukalion, just where the
sinews of the elbow join, there pierced he him through the forearm with
his bronze spear-head; so abode he with his arm weighed down, beholding
death before him; and Achilles smiting the neck with his sword swept
far both head and helm, and the marrow rose out of the backbone, and
the corpse lay stretched upon the earth. Then went he onward after
Peires’ noble son, Rhigmos, who had come from deep-soiled Thrace: him
in the midst he smote with his hurled javelin, and the point fixed in
his lung, and he fell forth of his chariot. And Areithoos his squire,
as he turned the horses round, he pierced in the back with his sharp
spear, and thrust him from the car, and the horse ran wild with fear.

As through deep glens rageth fierce fire on some parched mountain-side,
and the deep forest burneth, and the wind driving it whirleth every way
the flame, so raged he every way with his spear, as it had been a god,
pressing hard on the men he slew; and the black earth ran with blood.
For even as when one yoketh wide-browed bulls to tread white barley in
a stablished threshing-floor, and quickly is it trodden out beneath the
feet of the loud-lowing bulls, thus beneath great-hearted Achilles his
whole-hooved horses trampled corpses and shields together; and with
blood all the axletree below was sprinkled and the rims that ran around
the car, for blood-drops from the horses’ hooves splashed them, and
blood-drops from the tires of the wheels. But the son of Peleus pressed
on to win him glory, flecking with gore his irresistible hands.




BOOK XXI.


How Achilles fought with the River, and chased the men of Troy within
their gates.


But when now they came unto the ford of the fair-flowing river, even
eddying Xanthos, whom immortal Zeus begat, there sundering them he
chased the one part to the plain toward the city, even where the
Achaians were flying in affright the day before, when glorious Hector
was in his fury—thither poured some in flight, and Hera spread before
them thick mist to hinder them:—but half were pent into the
deep-flowing silver eddied river, and fell therein with a mighty noise,
and the steep channel sounded, and the banks around rang loudly; for
with shouting they swam therein hither and thither whirled round the
eddies. And as when at the rush of fire locusts take wing to fly unto a
river, and the unwearying fire flameth forth on them with sudden onset,
and they huddle in the water; so before Achilles was the stream of
deep-eddying Xanthos filled with the roar and the throng of horses and
men.

Then the seed of Zeus left behind him his spear upon the bank, leant
against tamarisk bushes, and leapt in, as it were a god, keeping his
sword alone, and devised grim work at heart, and smote as he turned him
every way about: and their groaning went up ghastly as they were
stricken by the sword, and the water reddened with blood. As before a
dolphin of huge maw fly other fish and fill the nooks of some
fair-havened bay, in terror, for he devoureth amain whichsoever of them
he may catch; so along the channels of that dread stream the Trojans
crouched beneath the precipitous sides. And when his hands were weary
of slaughter he chose twelve young men alive out of the river, an
atonement for Patroklos, Menoitios’ son that was dead. These brought he
forth amazed like fawns, and bound behind them their hands with
well-cut thongs, which they themselves wore on their pliant doublets,
and gave them to his comrades to lead down to the hollow ships. Then
again he made his onset, athirst for slaying.

There met he a son of Dardanid Priam, in flight out of the river,
Lykaon, whom once himself he took and brought unwilling out of his
father’s orchard, in a night assault; he was cutting with keen bronze
young shoots of a wild fig tree, to be hand-rails of a chariot; but to
him an unlooked-for bane came goodly Achilles. And at that time he sold
him into well-peopled Lemnos, sending him on ship board, and the son of
Jason gave a price for him; and thence a guest friend freed him with a
great ransom, Eetion of Imbros, and sent him to goodly Arisbe; whence
flying secretly he came to his father’s house. Eleven days he rejoiced
among his friends after he was come from Lemnos, but on the twelfth
once more God brought him into the hands of Achilles, who was to send
him to the house of Hades though nowise fain to go. Him when
fleet-footed noble Achilles saw bare of helm and shield, neither had he
a spear, but had thrown all to the ground; for he sweated grievously as
he tried to flee out of the river, and his knees were failing him for
weariness: then in wrath spake Achilles to his great heart: “Ha! verily
great marvel is this that I behold with my eyes. Surely then will the
proud Trojans whom I have slain rise up again from beneath the murky
gloom, since thus hath this man come back escaped from his pitiless
fate, though sold into goodly Lemnos, neither hath the deep of the
hoary sea stayed him, that holdeth many against their will. But come
then, of our spear’s point shall he taste, that I may see and learn in
my mind whether likewise he shall come back even from beneath, or
whether the life-giving Earth shall hold him down, she that holdeth so
even the strong.”

Thus pondered he in his place; but the other came near amazed, fain to
touch his knees, for his soul longed exceedingly to flee from evil
death and black destruction. Then goodly Achilles lifted his long spear
with intent to smite him, but he stooped and ran under it and caught
his knees; and the spear went over his back and stood in the ground,
hungering for flesh of men. Then Lykaon besought him, with one hand
holding his knees, while with the other he held the sharp spear and
loosed it not, and spake to him winged words: “I cry thee mercy,
Achilles; have thou regard and pity for me: to thee, O fosterling of
Zeus, am I in the bonds of suppliantship. For at thy table first I
tasted meal of Demeter on the day when thou didst take me captive in
the well-ordered orchard, and didst sell me away from my father and my
friends unto goodly Lemnos, and I fetched thee the price of a hundred
oxen. And now have I been ransomed for thrice that, and this is my
twelfth morn since I came to Ilios after much pain. Now once again hath
ruinous fate delivered me unto thy hands; surely I must be hated of
father Zeus, that he hath given me a second time unto thee; and to
short life my mother bare me, Laothoe, old Altes’ daughter—Altes who
ruleth among the war-loving Leleges, holding steep Pedasos on the
Satnioeis. His daughter Priam had to wife, with many others, and of her
were we two born, and thou wilt butcher both. Him among the foremost of
the foot-soldiers didst thou lay low, even godlike Polydoros, when thou
smotest him with they sharp spear: and now will it go hard with me
here, for no hope have I to escape thy hands, since God hath delivered
me thereunto. Yet one thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to
heart: slay me not, since I am not of the same mother as Hector, who
slew thy comrade the gentle and brave.”

Thus spake to him the noble son of Priam, beseeching him with words,
but he heard a voice implacable: “Fond fool, proffer me no ransom, nor
these words. Until Patroklos met his fated day, then was it welcomer to
my soul to spare the men of Troy, and many I took alive and sold beyond
the sea: but now there is none shall escape death, whomsoever before
Ilios God shall deliver into my hands—yes, even among all Trojans, but
chiefest among Priam’s sons. Ay, friend, thou too must die: why
lamentest thou? Patroklos is dead, who was better far than thou. Seest
thou not also what manner of man am I for might and goodliness? and a
good man was my father, and a goddess mother bare me. Yet over me too
hang death and forceful fate. There cometh morn or eve or some noonday
when my life too some man shall take in battle, whether with spear he
smite or arrow from the string.”

Thus spake he, and the other’s knees and heart were unstrung. He let go
Achilles’ spear, and sat with both hands outspread. But Achilles drew
his sharp sword and smote on the collar-bone beside the neck, and all
the two-edged sword sank into him, and he lay stretched prone upon the
earth, and blood flowed dark from him and soaked the earth. Him seized
Achilles by the foot and sent him down the stream, and over him
exulting spake winged words: “There lie thou among the fishes, which
shall lick off thy wound’s blood heedlessly, nor shall thy mother lay
thee on a bed and mourn for thee, but Skamandros shall bear thee on his
eddies into the broad bosom of the sea. Leaping along the wave shall
many a fish dart up to the dark ripple to eat of the white flesh of
Lykaon. So perish all, until we reach the citadel of sacred Ilios, ye
flying and I behind destroying. Nor even the River, fair-flowing,
silver-eddied, shall avail you, to whom long time forsooth ye sacrifice
many bulls, and among his eddies throw whole-hooved horses down alive.
For all this yet shall ye die the death, until ye pay all for
Patroklos’ slaying and the slaughter of Achaians whom at the swift
ships ye slew while I tarried afar.”

Thus spake he, but the River waxed ever more wroth in his heart, and
sought in his soul how he should stay goodly Achilles from his work,
and ward destruction from the Trojans. Meanwhile the son of Peleus with
his far-shadowing spear leapt, fain to slay him, upon Asteropaios son
of Pelegon, whom wide-flowing Axios begat of Periboia eldest of the
daughters of Akessamenos. Upon him set Achilles, and Asteropaios stood
against him from the river, holding two spears; for Xanthos put courage
into his heart, being angered for the slaughtered youths whom Achilles
was slaughtering along the stream and had no pity on them. Then when
the twain were come nigh in onset on each other, unto him first spake
fleet-footed noble Achilles: “Who and whence art thou of men, that
darest to come against me? Ill-fated are they whose children match them
with my might.”

And to him, made answer Pelegon’s noble son: “High-hearted son of
Peleus, why askest thou my lineage? I come from deep-soiled Paionia, a
land far off, leading Paionian men with their long spears, and this now
is the eleventh morn since I am come to Ilios. My lineage is of
wide-flowing Axios, who begat Pelegon famous with the spear, and he,
men say, was my father. Now fight we, noble Achilles!”

Thus spake he in defiance, and goodly Achilles lifted the Pelian ash:
but the warrior Asteropaios hurled with both spears together, for he
could use both hands alike, and with the one spear smote the shield,
but pierced it not right through, for the gold stayed it, the gift of a
god; and with the other he grazed the elbow of Achilles’ right arm, and
there leapt forth dark blood, but the point beyond him fixed itself in
the earth, eager to batten on flesh. Then in his turn Achilles hurled
on Asteropaios his straight-flying ash, fain to have slain him, but
missed the man and struck the high bank, and quivering half its length
in the bank he left the ashen spear. Then the son of Peleus drew his
sharp sword from his thigh and leapt fiercely at him, and he availed
not to draw with his stout hand Achilles’ ashen shaft from the steep
bank. Thrice shook he it striving to draw it forth, and thrice gave up
the strain, but the fourth time he was fain to bend and break the ashen
spear of the seed of Aiakos, but ere that Achilles closing on him reft
him of life with his sword. For in the belly he smote him beside the
navel, and all his bowels gushed out to the earth, and darkness covered
his eyes as he lay gasping. Then Achilles trampling on his breast
stripped off his armour and spake exultingly: “Lie there! It is hard to
strive against children of Kronos’ mighty son, even though one be
sprung from a River-god. Thou truly declarest thyself the seed of a
wide-flowing River, but I avow me of the linkage of great Zeus. My sire
is a man ruling many Myrmidons, Peleus the son of Aiakos, and Aiakos
was begotten of Zeus. As Zeus is mightier than seaward-murmuring
rivers, so is the seed of Zeus made mightier than the seed of a river.
Nay, there is hard beside thee a great river, if he may anywise avail;
but against Zeus the son of Kronos it is not possible to fight. For him
not even king Acheloios is match, nor yet the great strength of
deep-flowing Ocean, from whom all rivers flow and every sea, and all
springs and deep wells: yea, even he hath fear of the lightning of
great Zeus and his dread thunder, when it pealeth out of heaven.”

He said, and from the steep bank drew his bronze spear, and left there
Asteropaios whom he had slain, lying in the sands, and the dark water
flooded him. Around him eels and fishes swarmed, tearing and gnawing
the fat about his kidneys. But Achilles went on after the charioted
Paiones who still along the eddying river huddled in fear, when they
saw their best man in the stress of battle slain violently by the hands
and the sword of the son of Peleus. There slew he Thersilochos and
Mydon and Astypylos and Mnesos and Thrasios and Ainios and Ophelestes;
and more yet of the Paiones would swift Achilles have slain, had not
the deep-eddying River called unto him in wrath, in semblance of a man,
and from an eddy’s depth sent forth a voice: “O Achilles, thy might and
thy evil work are beyond the measure of men; for gods themselves are
ever helping thee. If indeed the son of Kronos hath delivered thee all
the Trojans to destroy, at least drive them forth from me and do thy
grim deeds on the plain, for filled with dead men is my pleasant bed,
nor can I pour my stream to the great sea, being choked with dead, and
thou slayest ruthlessly. Come then, let be; I am astonished, O captain
of hosts.”

And to him answered Achilles fleet of foot: “So be it, heaven-sprung
Skamandros, even as thou biddest. But the proud Trojans I will not
cease from slaying until I have driven them into their city, and have
made trial with Hector face to face whether he is to vanquish me or I
him.”

Thus saying, he set upon the Trojans, like a god. Then unto Apollo
spake the deep-eddying River: “Out on it, lord of the silver bow, child
of Zeus, thou hast not kept the ordinance of Kronos’ son, who charged
thee straitly to stand by the Trojans and to help them, until eve come
with light late-setting, and darken the deep-soiled earth.”

He said, and spear-famed Achilles sprang from the bank and leapt into
his midst; but he rushed on him in a furious wave, and stirred up all
his streams in tumult, and swept down the many dead who lay thick in
him, slain by Achilles; these out to land he cast with bellowing like a
bull, and saved the living under his fair streams, hiding them within
eddies deep and wide. But terribly around Achilles arose his tumultuous
wave, and the stream smote violently against his shield, nor availed he
to stand firm upon his feet. Then he grasped a tall fair-grown elm, and
it fell uprooted and tore away all the bank, and reached over the fair
river bed with its thick shoots, and stemmed the River himself, falling
all within him: and Achilles, struggling out of the eddy, made haste to
fly over the plain with his swift feet, for he was afraid. But the
great god ceased not, but arose upon him with darkness on his crest,
that he might stay noble Achilles from slaughter, and ward destruction
from the men of Troy. And the son of Peleus rushed away a spear’s
throw, with the swoop of a black eagle, the mighty hunter, strongest at
once and swiftest of winged birds. Like him he sped, and on his breast
the bronze rang terribly as he fled from beneath the onset, and behind
him the River rushed on with a mighty roar. As when a field-waterer
from a dark spring leadeth water along a bed through crops and garden
grounds, a mattock in his hands, casting forth hindrances from the
ditch, and as it floweth all pebbles are swept down, and swiftly
gliding it murmureth down a sloping place, and outrunneth him that is
its guide:—thus ever the river wave caught up Achilles for all his
speed; for gods are mightier than men. For whensoever fleet-footed
noble Achilles struggled to stand against it, and know whether all
immortals be upon him who inhabit spacious heaven, then would a great
wave of the heaven-sprung River beat upon his shoulders from above, and
he sprang upward with his feet, sore vexed at heart; and the River was
wearying his knees with violent rush beneath, devouring the earth from
under his feet. Then the son of Peleus cried aloud, looking up to the
broad heaven: “Zeus, Father, how doth none of the gods take it on him
in pity to save me from the River! after that let come to me what may.
None other of the inhabitants of Heaven is chargeable so much, but only
my dear mother, who beguiled me with false words, saying that under the
wall of the mail-clad men of Troy I must die by the swift arrows of
Apollo. Would that Hector had slain me, the best of men bred here: then
brave had been the slayer, and a brave man had he slain. But now by a
sorry death am I doomed to die, pent in this mighty river, like a
swineherd boy whom a torrent sweepeth down as he essayeth to cross it
in a storm.”

Thus spake he, and quickly Poseidon and Athene came near and stood
beside him, in the likeness of men, and taking his hands in theirs
pledged him in words. And the first that spake was Poseidon, Shaker of
the earth: “Son of Peleus, tremble not, neither be afraid; such helpers
of thee are we from the gods, approved of Zeus, even Pallas Athene and
I, for to be vanquished of a river is not appointed thee, but he will
soon give back, and thou wilt thyself perceive it: but we will give
thee wise counsel, if thou wilt obey it; hold not thy hand from
hazardous battle until within Ilios’ famous walls thou have pent the
Trojan host, even all that flee before thee. But do thou, when thou
hast taken the life of Hector, go back unto the ships; this glory we
give unto thee to win.”

They having thus spoken departed to the immortals, but he toward the
plain—for the bidding of gods was strong upon him—went onward; and all
the plain was filled with water-flood, and many beautiful arms and
corpses of slain youths were drifting there. So upward sprang his knees
as he rushed against the stream right on, nor stayed him the
wide-flowing River, for Athene put great strength in him. Neither did
Skamandros slacken his fierceness, but yet more raged against the son
of Peleus, and he curled crestwise the billow of his stream, lifting
himself on high, and on Simoeis he called with a shout: “Dear brother,
the strength of this man let us both join to stay, since quickly he
will lay waste the great city of king Priam, and the Trojans abide not
in the battle. Help me with speed, and fill thy streams with water from
thy springs, and urge on all thy torrents, and raise up a great wave,
and stir huge roaring of tree-stumps and stones, that we may stay the
fierce man who now is lording it, and deeming himself match for gods.
For neither, I ween, will strength avail him nor comeliness anywise,
nor that armour beautiful, which deep beneath the flood shall be
o’erlaid with slime, and himself I will wrap him in my sands and pour
round him countless shingle without stint, nor shall the Achaians know
where to gather his bones, so vast a shroud of silt will I heap over
them. Where he dieth there shall be his tomb, neither shall he have
need of any barrow to be raised, when the Achaians make his funeral.”

He said, and rushed in tumult on Achilles, raging from on high,
thundering with foam and blood and bodies of dead men. Then did a dark
wave of the heaven-sprung River stand towering up and overwhelm the son
of Peleus. But Hera cried aloud in terror of Achilles, lest the great
deep-eddying River sweep him away, and straightway she called to
Hephaistos, her dear son: “Rise, lame god, O my son; it was against
thee we thought that eddying Xanthos was matched in fight. Help with
all speed, put forth large blast of flame. Then will I go to raise a
strong storm out of the sea of the west wind and the white south which
shall utterly consume the dead Trojans and their armour, blowing the
angry flame. Thou along Xanthos’ banks burn up his trees and wrap
himself in fire, nor let him anywise turn thee back by soft words or by
threat, nor stay thy rage—only when I cry to thee with my voice, then
hold the unwearying fire.”

Thus spake she, and Hephaistos made ready fierce-blazing fire. First on
the plain fire blazed, and burnt the many dead who lay there thick,
slain by Achilles; and all the plain was parched and the bright water
stayed. And as when in late summer the north wind swiftly parcheth a
new watered orchard, and he that tilleth it is glad, thus was the whole
plain parched, and Hephaistos consumed the dead; then against the river
he turned his gleaming flame. Elms burnt and willow trees and
tamarisks, and lotos burnt and rush and galingale which round the fair
streams of the river grew in multitude. And the eels and fishes beneath
the eddies were afflicted, which through the fair streams tumbled this
way and that, in anguish at the blast of crafty Hephaistos. And the
strong River burned, and spake and called to him by name: “Hephaistos,
there is no god can match with thee, nor will I fight thee thus ablaze
with fire. Cease strife, yea, let noble Achilles drive the Trojans
forthwith out of their city; what have I to do with strife and
succour?”

Thus spake he, burnt with fire, for his fair streams were bubbling. And
as a cauldron boileth within, beset with much fire, melting the lard of
some fatted hog spurting up on all sides, and logs of firewood lie
thereunder,—so burned his fair streams in the fire, and the water
boiled. He had no mind to flow, but refrained him, for the breath of
cunning Hephaistos violently afflicted him. Then unto Hera, earnestly
beseeching her,’ he spake winged words: “Hera, wherefore hath thy son
assailed my stream to vex it above others? I am less chargeable than
all the rest that are helpers of the Trojans. But lo, I will give over,
if thou wilt, and let thy son give over too. And I further will swear
even this, that never will I ward the day of evil from the Trojans, not
even when all Troy is burning in the blaze of hungry fire, and the
warlike sons of Achaians are the burners thereof.”

Then when the white-armed goddess Hera heard his speech, straightway
she spake unto Hephaistos her dear son: “Hephaistos, hold, famed son;
it befitteth not thus for mortals’ sake to do violence to an immortal
god.”

Thus said she and Hephaistos quenched the fierce-blazing fire, and the
wave once more rolled down the fair river-bed.

So when the rage of Xanthos was overcome, both ceased, for Hera stayed
them, though in wrath. But among the other gods fell grievous bitter
strife, and their hearts were carried diverse in their breasts. And
they clashed together with a great noise, and the wide earth groaned,
and the clarion of great Heaven rang around. Zeus heard as he sate upon
Olympus, and his heart within him laughed pleasantly when he beheld
that strife of gods. Then no longer stood they asunder, for Ares
piercer of shields began the battle and first made for Athene with his
bronze spear, and spake a taunting word: “Wherefore, O dogfly, dost
thou match gods with gods in strife, with stormy daring, as thy great
spirit moveth thee? Rememberest thou not how thou movedst Diomedes
Tydeus’ son to wound me, and thyself didst take a visible spear and
thrust it straight at me and pierce through my fair skin? Therefore
deem I now that thou shalt pay me for all that thou hast done.”

Thus saying he smote on the dread tasselled aegis that not even the
lightning of Zeus can overcome—thereon smote bloodstained Ares with his
long spear. But she, giving back, grasped with stout hand a stone that
lay upon the plain, black, rugged, huge, which men of old time set to
be the landmark of a field; this hurled she, and smote impetuous Ares
on the neck, and unstrung his limbs. Seven roods he covered in his
fall, and soiled his hair with dust, and his armour rang upon him. And
Pallas Athene laughed, and spake to him winged words exultingly: “Fool,
not even yet hast thou learnt how far better than thou I claim to be,
that thus thou matchest thy might with mine. Thus shalt thou satisfy
thy mother’s curses, who deviseth mischief against thee in her wrath,
for that thou hast left the Achaians and givest the proud Trojan’s
aid.”

Thus having said she turned from him her shining eyes. Him did
Aphrodite daughter of Zeus take by the hand and lead away, groaning
continually, for scarce gathered he his spirit back to him. But when
the white-armed goddess Hera was aware of them, straightway she spake
unto Athene winged words: “Out on it, child of aegis-bearing Zeus,
maiden invincible, lo there the dogfly is leading Ares destroyer of men
out of the fray of battle down the throng—nay then, pursue her.”

She said, and Athene sped after her with heart exultant, and made at
her and smote her with stout hand upon the breast, and straightway her
knees and heart were unstrung. So they twain lay on the bounteous
earth, and she spake winged words exultingly: “Such let all be who give
the Trojans aid when they fight against the mailed Argives. Be they
even so bold and brave as Aphrodite when she came to succour Ares and
defied my might. Then should we long ago have ceased from war, having
laid waste the stablished citadel of Ilios.”

[She said, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled.] Then to Apollo
spake the earth-shaking lord: “Phoebus, why stand we apart? It
befitteth not after the rest have begun: that were the more shameful if
without fighting we should go to Olympus to the bronze-thresholded
house of Zeus. Begin, for thou art younger; it were not meet for me,
since I was born first and know more. Fond god, how foolish is thy
heart! Thou rememberest not all the ills we twain alone of gods endured
at Ilios, when by ordinance of Zeus we came to proud Laomedon and
served him through a year for promised recompense, and he laid on us
his commands. I round their city built the Trojans a wall, wide and
most fair, that the city might be unstormed, and thou Phoebus, didst
herd shambling crook-horned kine among the spurs of woody many-folded
Ida. But when the joyous seasons were accomplishing the term of hire,
then redoubtable Laomedon robbed us of all hire, and sent us off with
threats. He threatened that he would bind together our feet and hands
and sell us into far-off isles, and the ears of both of us he vowed to
shear off with the sword. So we went home with angry hearts, wroth for
the hire he promised and gave us not. To his folk not thou showest
favour, nor essayest with us how the proud Trojans may be brought low
and perish miserably with their children and noble wives.”

Then to him answered King Apollo the Far-darter: “Shaker of the earth,
of no sound mind wouldst thou repute me if I should fight against thee
for the sake of pitiful mortals, who like unto leaves now live in
glowing life, consuming the fruit of the earth, and now again pine into
death. Let us with all speed cease from combat, and let them do battle
by themselves.”

Thus saying he turned away, for he felt shame to deal in blows with his
father’s brother. But his sister upbraided him sore, the queen of wild
beasts, huntress Artemis, and spake a taunting word: “So then thou
fleest, Far-darter, hast quite yielded to Poseidon the victory, and
given him glory for naught! Fond god, why bearest thou an ineffectual
bow in vain? Let me not hear thee again in the halls of our sire boast
as before among the immortal gods thou wouldst stand up to fight
against Poseidon.”

Thus spake she, but far-darting Apollo answered her not. But angrily
the noble spouse of Zeus [upbraided the Archer Queen with taunting
words:] “How now art thou fain, bold vixen, to set thyself against me?
Hard were it for thee to match my might, bow-bearer though thou art,
since against women Zeus made thee a lion, and giveth thee to slay
whomso of them thou wilt. Truly it is better on the mountains to slay
wild beasts and deer than to fight amain with mightier than thou. But
if thou wilt, try war, that thou mayest know well how far stronger am
I, since thou matchest thy might with mine.”

She said, and with her left hand caught both the other’s hands by the
wrist, and with her right took the bow from off her shoulders, and
therewith, smiling, beat her on the ears as she turned this way and
that; and the swift arrows fell out of her quiver. And weeping from
before her the goddess fled like a dove that from before a falcon
flieth to a hollow rock, a cleft—for she was not fated to be
caught;—thus Artemis fled weeping, and left her bow and arrows where
they lay. Then to Leto spake the Guide, the slayer of Argus: “Leto,
with thee will I no wise fight; a grievous thing it is to come to blows
with wives of cloud-gathering Zeus; but boast to thy heart’s content
among the immortal gods that thou didst vanquish me by might and main.”

Thus said he, and Leto gathered up the curved bow and arrows fallen
hither and thither amid the whirl of dust: so taking her daughter’s bow
she went back. And the maiden came to Olympus, to the
bronze-thresholded house of Zeus, and weeping set herself on her
father’s knee, while round her her divine vesture quivered: and her
father, Kronos’ son, took her to him and asked of her, laughing gently:
“Who of the inhabitants of heaven, dear child, hath dealt with thee
thus [hastily, as though thou hadst been doing some wrong thing
openly]?”

And to him in answer spake the fair-crowned queen of the echoing chase:
“It was thy wife that buffeted me, father, the white-armed Hera, from
whom are strife and contention come upon the immortals.”

Thus talked they unto one another. Then Phoebus Apollo entered into
sacred Ilios, for he was troubled for the wall of the well-builded
city, lest the Danaans waste it before its hour upon that day. But the
other ever-living gods went to Olympus, some angry and some greatly
triumphing, and sat down beside Zeus who hideth himself in dark clouds.

Now Achilles was still slaying the Trojans, both themselves and their
whole-hooved horses. And as when a smoke goeth up to the broad heaven,
when a city burneth, kindled by the wrath of gods, and causeth toil to
all, and griefs to many, thus caused Achilles toil and griefs to the
Trojans. And the old man Priam stood on the sacred tower, and was aware
of dread Achilles, how before him the Trojans thronged in rout, nor was
any succour found of them. Then with a cry he went down from the tower,
to rouse the gallant warders along the walls: “Hold open the gates in
your hands until the folk come to the city in their rout, for closely
is Achilles chasing them—now trow I there will be deadly deeds. And
when they are gathered within the wall and are taking breath, then
again shut back the gate-wings firmly builded; for I fear lest that
murderous man spring in within the wall.”

Thus spake he, and they opened the gates and thrust back the bolts; and
the gates flung back gave safety. Then Apollo leapt forth to the front
that he might ward destruction from the Trojans. They straight for the
city and the high wall were fleeing, parched with thirst and
dust-grimed from the plain, and Achilles chased them vehemently with
his spear, for strong frenzy possessed his heart continually, and he
thirsted to win him renown. Then would the sons of the Achaians have
taken high-gated Troy, had not Phoebus Apollo aroused goodly Agenor,
Antenor’s son, a princely man and strong. In his heart he put good
courage, and himself stood by his side that he might ward off the
grievous visitations of death, leaning against the oak, and he was
shrouded in thick mist. So when Agenor was aware of Achilles waster of
cities, he halted, and his heart much wavered as he stood; and in
trouble he spake to his great heart: “Ay me, if I flee before mighty
Achilles, there where the rest are driven terror-struck, nathless will
he overtake me and slaughter me as a coward. Or what if I leave these
to be driven before Achilles the son of Peleus, and flee upon my feet
from the wall by another way to the Ileian plain, until I come to the
spurs of Ida, and hide me in the underwood? So then at evening, having
bathed in the river and refreshed me of sweat, I might return to Ilios.
Nay, why doth my heart debate thus within me? Lest he might be aware of
me as I get me from the city for the plain, and speeding after overtake
me with swift feet; then will it no more be possible to avoid the
visitation of death, for he is exceeding mighty above all mankind. What
then if in front of the city I go forth to meet him? Surely his flesh
too is penetrable by sharp bronze, and there is but one life within,
and men say he is mortal, howbeit Zeus the son of Kronos giveth him
renown.”

Thus saying, he gathered himself to await Achilles, and within him his
stout heart was set to strive and fight. As a leopardess goeth forth
from a deep thicket to affront a huntsman, nor is afraid at heart, nor
fleeth when she heareth the bay of hounds; for albeit the man first
smite her with thrust or throw, yet even pierced through with the spear
she ceaseth not from her courage until she either grapple or be slain,
so noble Antenor’s son, goodly Agenor, refused to flee till he should
put Achilles to the proof, but held before him the circle of his
shield, and aimed at him with his spear, and cried aloud: “Doubtless
thou hopest in thy heart, noble Achilles, on this day to sack the city
of the proud men of Troy. Fond man, there shall many woful things yet
be wrought before it, for within it we are many men and staunch, who in
front of our parents dear and wives and sons keep Ilios safe; but thou
shalt here meet death, albeit so redoubtable and bold a man of war.”

He said, and hurled his sharp spear with weighty hand, and smote him on
the leg beneath the knee, nor missed his mark, and the greave of
new-wrought tin rang terribly on him; but the bronze bounded back from
him it smote, nor pierced him, for the god’s gift drave it back. Then
the son of Peleus in his turn made at godlike Agenor, but Apollo
suffered him not to win renown, but caught away Agenor, and shrouded
him in thick mist, and sent him in peace to be gone out of the war.
Then by wile kept the son of Peleus away from the folk, for in complete
semblance of Agenor himself he stood before the feet of Achilles, who
hasted to run upon him and chase him. And while he chased him over the
wheat-bearing plain, edging him toward the deep-eddying river
Skamandros, as he ran but a little in front of him (for by wile Apollo
beguiled him that he kept ever hoping to overtake him in the race),
meantime the other Trojans in common rout came gladly unto their
fastness, and the city was filled with the throng of them. Neither had
they heart to await one another outside the city and wall, and to know
who might have escaped and who had perished in the fight, but
impetuously they poured into the city, whomsoever of them his feet and
knees might save.




BOOK XXII.


How Achilles fought with Hector, and slew him, and brought his body to
the ships.


Thus they throughout the city, scared like fawns, were cooling their
sweat and drinking and slaking their thirst, leaning on the fair
battlements, while the Achaians drew near the wall, setting shields to
shoulders. But Hector deadly fate bound to abide in his place, in front
of Ilios and the Skaian gates. Then to the son of Peleus spake Phoebus
Apollo: “Wherefore, son of Peleus, pursuest thou me with swift feet,
thyself being mortal and I a deathless god? Thou hast not even yet
known me, that I am a god, but strivest vehemently. Truly thou
regardest not thy task among the affliction of the Trojans whom thou
affrightedst, who now are gathered into the city, while thou heat
wandered hither. Me thou wilt never slay, for I am not subject unto
death.”

Then mightily moved spake unto him Achilles fleet of foot: “Thou hast
baulked me, Far-darter, most mischievous of all the gods, in that thou
hast turned me hither from the wall: else should full many yet have
bitten the dust or ever within Ilios had they come. Now hast thou
robbed me of great renown, and lightly hast saved them, because thou
hadst no vengeance to fear thereafter. Verily I would avenge me on
thee, had I but the power.”

Thus saying toward the city he was gone in pride of heart, rushing like
some victorious horse in a chariot, that runneth lightly at full speed
over the plain; so swiftly plied Achilles his feet and knees. Him the
old man Priam first beheld as he sped across the plain, blazing as the
star that cometh forth at harvest-time, and plain seen his rays shine
forth amid the host of stars in the darkness of night, the star whose
name men call Orion’s Dog. Brightest of all is he, yet for an evil sign
is he set, and bringeth much fever upon hapless men. Even so on
Achilles’ breast the bronze gleamed as he ran. And the old man cried
aloud and beat upon his head with his hands, raising them on high, and
with a cry called aloud beseeching his dear son; for he before the
gates was standing, all hot for battle with Achilles. And the old man
spake piteously unto him, stretching forth his hands: “Hector, beloved
son, I pray thee await not this man alone with none beside thee, lest
thou quickly meet thy doom, slain by the son of Peleus, since he is
mightier far, a merciless man. Would the gods loved him even as do I!
then quickly would dogs and vultures devour him on the field—thereby
would cruel pain go from my heart—the man who hath bereft me of many
valiant sons, slaying them and selling them captive into far-off isles.
Ay even now twain of my children, Lykaon and Polydoros, I cannot see
among the Trojans that throng into the fastness, sons whom Laothoe bare
me, a princess among women. If they be yet alive amid the enemy’s host,
then will we ransom them with bronze and gold, for there is store
within, for much goods gave the old man famous Altes to his child. If
they be dead, then even in the house of Hades shall they be a sorrow to
my soul and to their mother, even to us who gave them birth, but to the
rest of the folk a briefer sorrow, if but thou die not by Achilles’
hand. Nay, come within the wall, my child, that thou preserve the men
and women of Troy, neither give great triumph to the son of Peleus, and
be thyself bereft of sweet life. Have compassion also on me, the
helpless one, who still can feel, ill-fated; whom the father, Kronos’
son, will bring to naught by a grievous doom in the path of old age,
having seen full many ills, his sons perishing and his daughters
carried away captive, and his chambers laid waste and infant children
hurled to the ground in terrible war, and his sons’ wives dragged away
by the ruinous hands of the Achaians. Myself then last of all at the
street door will ravening dogs tear, when some one by stroke or throw
of the sharp bronze hath bereft my limbs of life—even the dogs I reared
in my halls about my table and to guard my door, which then having
drunk my blood, maddened at heart shall lie in the gateway. A young man
all beseemeth, even to be slain in war, to be torn by the sharp bronze
and lie on the field; though he be dead yet is all honourable to him,
whate’er be seen: but when dogs defile the hoary head and hoary beard
of an old man slain, this is the most piteous thing that cometh upon
hapless men.”

Thus spake the old man, and grasped his hoary hairs, plucking them from
his head, but he persuaded not Hector’s soul. Then his mother in her
turn wailed tearfully, loosening the folds of her robe, while with the
other hand she showed her breast; and through her tears spake to him
winged words: “Hector, my child, have regard unto this bosom and pity
me, if ever I gave thee consolation of my breast. Think of it, dear
child, and from this side the wall drive back the foe, nor stand in
front to meet him. He is merciless; if he slay thee it will not be on a
bed that I or thy wife shall bewail thee, my own dear child, but far
away from us by the ships of the Argives will swift dogs devour thee.”

Thus they with wailing spake to their dear son, beseeching him sore,
yet they persuaded not Hector’s soul, but he stood awaiting Achilles as
he drew nigh in giant might. As a serpent of the mountains upon his den
awaiteth a man, having fed on evil poisons, and fell wrath hath entered
into him, and terribly he glared as he coileth himself about his den,
so Hector with courage unquenchable gave not back, leaning his shining
shield against a jutting tower. Then sore troubled he spake to his
great heart: “Ay me, if I go within the gates and walls, Polydamas will
be first to bring reproach against me, since he bade me lead the
Trojans to the city during this ruinous night, when noble Achilles
arose. But I regarded him not, yet surely it had been better far. And
now that I have undone the host by my wantonness, I am ashamed before
the men of Troy and women of trailing robes, lest at any time some
worse man than I shall say: ‘Hector by trusting his own might undid the
host.’ So will they speak; then to me would it be better far to face
Achilles and either slay him and go home, or myself die gloriously
before the city. Or what if I lay down my bossy shield and my stout
helm, and lean my spear against the wall, and go of myself to meet
noble Achilles and promise him that Helen, and with her all possessions
that Alexandros brought in hollow ships to Troy, the beginning of
strife, we will give to the Sons of Atreus to take away, and
therewithal to divide in half with the Achaians all else that this city
holdeth: and if thereafter I obtain from the Trojans an oath of the
Elders that they will hide nothing but divide all in twain [whatever
wealth the pleasant city hold within]? But wherefore doth my heart
debate thus? I might come unto him and he would not pity or regard me
at all, but presently slay me unarmed as it were but a woman, if I put
off my armour. No time is it now to dally with him from oaktree or from
rock, like youth with maiden, as youth and maiden hold dalliance one
with another. Better is it to join battle with all speed: let us know
upon which of us twain the Olympian shall bestow renown.”

Thus pondered he as he stood, but nigh on him came Achilles, peer of
Enyalios warrior of the waving helm, brandishing from his right
shoulder the Pelian ash, his terrible spear; and all around the bronze
on him flashed like the gleam of blazing fire or of the Sun as he
ariseth. And trembling seized Hector as he was aware of him, nor
endured he to abide in his place, but left the gates behind him and
fled in fear. And the son of Peleus darted after him, trusting in his
swift feet. As a falcon upon the mountains, swiftest of winged things,
swoopeth fleetly after a trembling dove; and she before him fleeth,
while he with shrill screams hard at hand still darteth at her, for his
heart urgeth him to seize her; so Achilles in hot haste flew straight
for him, and Hector fled beneath the Trojans’ wall, and plied swift
knees. They past the watch-place and wind-waved wild fig-tree sped
ever, away from under the wall, along the waggon-track, and came to the
two fair-flowing springs, where two fountains rise that feed
deep-eddying Skamandros. The one floweth with warm water, and smoke
goeth up therefrom around as it were from a blazing fire, while the
other even in summer floweth forth like cold hail or snow or ice that
water formeth. And there beside the springs are broad washing-troughs
hard by, fair troughs of stone, where wives and fair daughters of the
men of Troy were wont to wash bright raiment, in the old time of peace,
before the sons of the Achaians came. Thereby they ran, he flying, he
pursuing. Valiant was the flier but far mightier he who fleetly pursued
him. For not for beast of sacrifice or for an oxhide were they
striving, such as are prizes for men’s speed of foot, but for the life
of horse-taming Hector was their race. And as when victorious
whole-hooved horses run rapidly round the turning-points, and some
great prize lieth in sight, be it a tripod or a woman, in honour of a
man that is dead, so thrice around Priam’s city circled those twain
with flying feet, and all the gods were gazing on them. Then among them
spake first the father of gods and men: “Ay me, a man beloved I see
pursued around the wall. My heart is woe for Hector, who hath burnt for
me many thighs of oxen amid the crests of many-folded Ida, and other
times on the city-height; but now is goodly Achilles pursuing him with
swift feet round Priam’s town. Come, give your counsel, gods, and
devise whether we shall save him from death or now at last slay him,
valiant though he be, by the hand of Achilles Peleus’ son.”

Then to him answered the bright-eyed goddess Athene: “O Father, Lord of
the bright lightning and the dark cloud, what is this thou hast said? A
man that is a mortal, doomed long ago by fate, wouldst thou redeem back
from ill-boding death? Do it, but not all we other gods approve.”

And unto her in answer spake cloud-gathering Zeus: “Be of good cheer,
Trito-born, dear child: not in full earnest speak I, and I would fain
be kind to thee. Do as seemeth good to thy mind, and draw not back.”

Thus saying he roused Athene, that already was set thereon, and from
the crests of Olympus she darted down.

But after Hector sped fleet Achilles chasing him vehemently. And as
when on the mountains a hound hunteth the fawn of a deer, having
started it from its covert, through glens and glades, and if it crouch
to baffle him under a bush, yet scenting it out the hound runneth
constantly until he find it; so Hector baffled not Peleus’ fleet-footed
son. Oft as he set himself to dart under the well-built walls over
against the Dardanian gates, if haply from above they might succour him
with darts, so oft would Achilles gain on him and turn him toward the
plain, while himself he sped ever on the city-side. And as in a dream
one faileth in chase of a flying man, the one faileth in his flight and
the other in his chase—so failed Achilles to overtake him in the race,
and Hector to escape. And thus would Hector have avoided the visitation
of death, had not this time been utterly the last wherein Apollo came
nigh to him, who nerved his strength and his swift knees. For to the
host did noble Achilles sign with his head, and forbade them to hurl
bitter darts against Hector, lest any smiting him should gain renown,
and he himself come second. But when the fourth time they had reached
the springs, then the Father hung his golden balances, and set therein
two lots of dreary death, one of Achilles, one of horse-taming Hector,
and held them by the midst and poised. Then Hector’s fated day sank
down, and fell to the house of Hades, and Phoebus Apollo left him. But
to Peleus’ son came the bright-eyed goddess Athene, and standing near
spake to him winged words: “Now verily, glorious Achilles dear to Zeus,
I have hope that we twain shall carry off great glory to the ships for
the Achaians, having slain Hector, for all his thirst for fight. No
longer is it possible for him to escape us, not even though far-darting
Apollo should travail sore, grovelling before the Father, aegis-bearing
Zeus. But do thou now stand and take breath, and I will go and persuade
this man to confront thee in fight.”

Thus spake Athene, and he obeyed, and was glad at heart, and stood
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen-spear. And she left him and came to
noble Hector, like unto Deiphobos in shape and in strong voice, and
standing near spake to him winged words: “Dear brother, verily fleet
Achilles doth thee violence, chasing thee round Priam’s town with swift
feet: but come let us make a stand and await him on our defence.”

Then answered her great Hector of the glancing helm: “Deiphobos, verily
aforetime wert thou far dearest of my brothers, but now methinks I
shall honour thee even more, in that thou hast dared for my sake, when
thou sawest me, to come forth of the wall, while the others tarry
within.”

Then to him again spake the bright-eyed goddess Athene: “Dear brother,
of a truth my father and lady mother and my comrades around besought me
much, entreating me in turn, to tarry there, so greatly do they all
tremble before him; but my heart within was sore with dismal grief. And
now fight we with straight-set resolve and let there be no sparing of
spears, that we may know whether Achilles is to slay us and carry our
bloody spoils to the hollow ships, or whether he might be vanquished by
thy spear.”

Thus saying Athene in her subtlety led him on. And when they were come
nigh in onset on one another, to Achilles first spake great Hector of
the glancing helm: “No longer, son of Peleus, will I fly thee, as
before I thrice ran round the great town of Priam, and endured not to
await thy onset. Now my heart biddeth me stand up against thee; I will
either slay or be slain. But come hither and let us pledge us by our
gods, for they shall be best witnesses and beholders of covenants: I
will entreat thee in no outrageous sort, if Zeus grant me to outstay
thee, and if I take thy life, but when I have despoiled thee of thy
glorious armour, O Achilles, I will give back thy dead body to the
Achaians, and do thou the same.”

But unto him with grim gaze spake Achilles fleet of foot: “Hector, talk
not to me, thou madman, of covenants. As between men and lions there is
no pledge of faith, nor wolves and sheep can be of one mind, but
imagine evil continually against each other, so is it impossible for
thee and me to be friends, neither shall be any pledge between us until
one or other shall have fallen and glutted with blood Ares, the
stubborn god of war. Bethink thee of all thy soldiership: now behoveth
it thee to quit thee as a good spearman and valiant man of war. No
longer is there way of escape for thee, but Pallas Athene will
straightway subdue thee to my spear; and now in one hour shalt thou pay
back for all my sorrows for my friends whom thou hast slain in the fury
of thy spear.”

He said, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled. And noble
Hector watched the coming thereof and avoided it; for with his eye on
it he crouched, and the bronze spear flew over him, and fixed itself in
the earth; but Pallas Athene caught it up and gave it back to Achilles,
unknown of Hector shepherd of hosts. Then Hector spake unto the noble
son of Peleus: “Thou hast missed, so no wise yet, godlike Achilles, has
thou known from Zeus the hour of my doom, though thou thoughtest it.
Cunning of tongue art thou and a deceiver in speech, that fearing thee
I might forget my valour and strength. Not as I flee shalt thou plant
thy spear in my reins, but drive it straight through my breast as I set
on thee, if God hath given thee to do it. Now in thy turn avoid my
spear of bronze. O that thou mightst take it all into thy flesh! Then
would the war be lighter to the Trojans, if but thou wert dead, for
thou art their greatest bane.”

He said, and poised his long-shadowed spear and hurled it, and smote
the midst of the shield of Peleus’ son, and missed him not: but far
from the shield the spear leapt back. And Hector was wroth that his
swift weapon had left his hand in vain, and he stood downcast, for he
had no second ashen spear. And he called with a loud shout to Deiphobos
of the white shield, and asked of him a long spear, but he was no wise
nigh. Then Hector knew he truth in his heart, and spake and said: “Ay
me, now verily the gods have summoned me to death. I deemed the warrior
Deiphobos was by my side, but he is within the wall, and it was Athene
who played me false. Now therefore is evil death come very nigh me, not
far off, nor is there way of escape. This then was from of old the
pleasure of Zeus and of the far-darting son of Zeus, who yet before
were fain to succour me: but now my fate hath found me. At least let me
not die without a struggle or ingloriously, but in some great deed of
arms whereof men yet to be born shall hear.”

Thus saying he drew his sharp sword that by his flank hung great and
strong, and gathered himself and swooped like a soaring eagle that
darteth to the plain through the dark clouds to seize a tender lamb or
crouching hare. So Hector swooped, brandishing his sharp sword. And
Achilles made at him, for his heart was filled with wild fierceness,
and before his breast he made a covering with his fair graven shield,
and tossed his bright four-plated helm; and round it waved fair golden
plumes [that Hephaistos had set thick about the crest.]. As a star
goeth among stars in the darkness of night, Hesperos, fairest of all
stars set in heaven, so flashed there forth a light from the keen spear
Achilles poised in his right hand, devising mischief against noble
Hector, eyeing his fair flesh to find the fittest place. Now for the
rest of him his flesh was covered by the fair bronze armour he stripped
from strong Patroklos when he slew him, but there was an opening where
the collar bones coming from the shoulders clasp the neck, even at the
gullet, where destruction of life cometh quickliest; there, as he came
on, noble Achilles drave at him with his spear, and right through the
tender neck went the point. Yet the bronze-weighted ashen spear clave
not the windpipe, so that he might yet speak words of answer to his
foe. And he fell down in the dust, and noble Achilles spake exultingly:
“Hector, thou thoughtest, whilst thou wert spoiling Patroklos, that
thou wouldst be safe, and didst reck nothing of me who was afar, thou
fool. But away among the hollow ships his comrade, a mightier far, even
I, was left behind, who now have unstrung thy knees. Thee shall dogs
and birds tear foully, but his funeral shall the Achaians make.”

Then with faint breath spake unto him Hector of the glancing helm: “I
pray thee by thy life and knees and parents leave me not for dogs of
the Achaians to devour by the ships, but take good store of bronze and
gold, gifts that my father and lady mother shall give to thee, and give
them home my body back again, that the Trojans and Trojans’ wives give
me my due of fire after my death.”

But unto him with grim gaze spake Achilles fleet of foot: “Entreat me
not, dog, by knees or parents. Would that my heart’s desire could so
bid me myself to carve and eat raw thy flesh, for the evil thou hast
wrought me, as surely is there none that shall keep the dogs from thee,
not even should they bring ten or twenty fold ransom and here weigh it
out, and promise even more, not even were Priam Dardanos’ son to bid
pay thy weight in gold, not even so shall thy lady mother lay thee on a
bed to mourn her son, but dogs and birds shall devour thee utterly.”

Then dying spake unto him Hector of the glancing helm: “Verily I know
thee and behold thee as thou art, nor was I destined to persuade thee;
truly thy heart is iron in thy breast. Take heed now lest I draw upon
thee wrath of gods, in the day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo slay thee,
for all thy valour, at the Skaian gate.”

He ended, and the shadow of death came down upon him, and his soul flew
forth of his limbs and was gone to the house of Hades, wailing her
fate, leaving her vigour and youth. Then to the dead man spake noble
Achilles: “Die: for my death, I will accept it whensoever Zeus and the
other immortal gods are minded to accomplish it.”

He said, and from the corpse drew forth his bronze spear, and set it
aside, and stripped the bloody armour from the shoulders. And other
sons of Achaians ran up around, who gazed upon the stature and
marvellous goodliness of Hector. Nor did any stand by but wounded him,
and thus would many a man say looking toward his neighbour: “Go to, of
a truth far easier to handle is Hector now than when he burnt the ships
with blazing fire.” Thus would many a man say, and wound him as he
stood hard by. And when fleet noble Achilles had despoiled him, he
stood up among the Achaians and spake winged words: “Friends, chiefs
and counsellors of the Argives, since the gods have vouchsafed us to
vanquish this man who hath done us more evil than all the rest
together, come let us make trial in arms round about the city, that we
may know somewhat of the Trojans’ purpose, whether since he hath fallen
they will forsake the citadel, or whether they are minded to abide,
albeit Hector is no more. But wherefore doth my heart debate thus?
There lieth by the ships a dead man unbewailed, unburied, Patroklos;
him will I not forget, while I abide among the living and my knees can
stir. Nay if even in the house of Hades the dead forget their dead, yet
will I even there be mindful of my dear comrade. But come, ye sons of
the Achaians, let us now, singing our song of victory, go back to the
hollow ships and take with us our foe. Great glory have we won; we have
slain the noble Hector, unto whom the Trojans prayed throughout their
city, as he had been a god.”

He said, and devised foul entreatment of noble Hector. The tendons of
both feet behind he slit from heel to ankle-joint, and thrust
therethrough thongs of ox-hide, and bound him to his chariot, leaving
his head to trail. And when he had mounted the chariot and lifted
therein the famous armour, he lashed his horses to speed, and they
nothing loth flew on. And dust rose around him that was dragged, and
his dark hair flowed loose on either side, and in the dust lay all his
once fair head, for now had Zeus given him over to his foes to entreat
foully in his own native land.

Thus was his head all grimed with dust. But his mother when she beheld
her son, tore her hair and cast far from her her shining veil, and
cried aloud with an exceeding bitter cry. And piteously moaned his
father, and around them the folk fell to crying and moaning throughout
the town. Most like it seemed as though all beetling Ilios were burning
utterly in fire. Scarcely could the folk keep back the old man in his
hot desire to get him forth of the Dardanian gates. For he besought
them all, casting himself down in the mire, and calling on each man by
his name: “Hold, friends, and though you love me leave me to get me
forth of the city alone and go unto the ships of the Achaians. Let me
pray this accursed horror-working man, if haply he may feel shame
before his age-fellows and pity an old man. He also hath a father such
as I am, Peleus, who begat and reared him to be a bane of Trojans—and
most of all to me hath he brought woe. So many sons of mine hath he
slain in their flower—yet for all my sorrow for the rest I mourn them
all less than this one alone, for whom my sharp grief will bring me
down to the house of Hades—even Hector. Would that he had died in my
arms; then would we have wept and wailed our fill, his mother who bore
him to her ill hap, and I myself.”

Thus spake he wailing, and all the men of the city made moan with him.
And among the women of Troy, Hekabe led the wild lament: “My child, ah,
woe is me! wherefore should I live in my pain, now thou art dead, who
night and day wert my boast through the city, and blessing to all, both
men and women of Troy throughout the town, who hailed thee as a god,
for verily an exceeding glory to them wert thou in thy life:—now death
and fate have overtaken thee.”

Thus spake she wailing. But Hector’s wife knew not as yet, for no true
messenger had come to tell her how her husband abode without the gates,
but in an inner chamber of the lofty house she was weaving a double
purple web, and broidering therein manifold flowers. Then she called to
her goodly-haired handmaids through the house to set a great tripod on
the fire, that Hector might have warm washing when he came home out of
the battle fond heart, and was unaware how, far from all washings,
bright-eyed Athene had slain him by the hand of Achilles. But she heard
shrieks and groans from the battlements, and her limbs reeled, and the
shuttle fell from her hands to earth. Then again among her
goodly-haired maids she spake: “Come two of ye this way with me that I
may see what deeds are done. It was the voice of my husband’s noble
mother that I heard, and in my own breast my heart leapeth to my mouth
and my knees are numbed beneath me: surely some evil thing is at hand
against the children of Priam. Would that such word might never reach
my ear! yet terribly I dread lest noble Achilles have cut off bold
Hector from the city by himself and chased him to the plain and ere
this ended his perilous pride that possessed him, for never would he
tarry among the throng of men but ran out before them far, yielding
place to no man in his hardihood.”

Thus saying she sped through the chamber like one mad, with beating
heart, and with her went her handmaidens. But when she came to the
battlements and the throng of men, she stood still upon the wall and
gazed, and beheld him dragged before the city:—swift horses dragged him
recklessly toward the hollow ships of the Achaians. Then dark night
came on her eyes and shrouded her, and she fell backward and gasped
forth her spirit. From off her head she shook the bright attiring
thereof, frontlet and net and woven band, and veil, the veil that
golden Aphrodite gave her on the day when Hector of the glancing helm
led her forth of the house of Eetion, having given bride-gifts untold.
And around her thronged her husband’s sisters and his brothers’ wives,
who held her up among them, distraught even to death. But when at last
she came to herself and her soul returned into her breast, then wailing
with deep sobs she spake among the women of Troy: “O Hector, woe is me!
to one fate then were we both born, thou in Troy in the house of Priam,
and I in Thebe under woody Plakos, in the house of Eetion, who reared
me from a little one—ill-fated sire of cruel-fated child. Ah, would he
have begotten me not. Now thou to the house of Hades beneath the secret
places of the earth departest, and me in bitter mourning thou leavest a
widow in thy halls: and thy son is but an infant child—son of unhappy
parents, thee and me—nor shalt thou profit him, Hector, since thou art
dead, neither he thee. For even if he escape the Achaians’ woful war,
yet shall labour and sorrow cleave unto him hereafter, for other men
shall seize his lands. The day of orphanage sundereth a child from his
fellows, and his head is bowed down ever, and his cheeks are wet with
tears. And in his need the child seeketh his father’s friends, plucking
this one by cloak and that by coat, and one of them that pity him
holdeth his cup a little to his mouth, and moisteneth his lips, but his
palate he moisteneth not. And some child unorphaned thrusteth him from
the feast with blows and taunting words, ‘Out with thee! no father of
thine is at our board.’ Then weeping to his widowed mother shall he
return, even Astyanax, who erst upon his father’s knee ate only marrow
and fat flesh of sheep; and when sleep fell on him and he ceased from
childish play, then in bed in his nurse’s arms he would slumber softly
nested, having satisfied his heart with good things; but now that he
hath lost his father he will suffer many ills, Astyanax—that name the
Trojans gave him, because thou only wet the defence of their gates and
their long walls. But now by the beaked ships, far from thy parents,
shall coiling worms devour thee when the dogs have had their fill, as
thou liest naked; yet in these halls lieth raiment of thine, delicate
and fair, wrought by the hands of women. But verily all these will I
consume with burning fire—to thee no profit, since thou wilt never lie
therein, yet that his be honour to thee from the men and the women of
Troy.”

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan.




BOOK XXIII.


Of the funeral of Patroklos, and the funeral games.


Thus they throughout the city made moan: but the Achaians when they
were come to the ships and to the Hellespont were scattered each to his
own ship: only the Myrmidons Achilles suffered not to be scattered, but
spake among his comrades whose delight was in war: “Fleet-horsed
Myrmidons, my trusty comrades, let us not yet unyoke our whole-hooved
steeds from their cars, but with horses and chariots let us go near and
mourn Patroklos, for such is the honour of the dead. Then when we have
our fill of grievous wailing, we will unyoke the horses and all sup
here.”

He said, and they with one accord made lamentation, and Achilles led
their mourning. So thrice around the dead they drave their well-maned
steeds, moaning; and Thetis stirred among them desire of wailing.
Bedewed were the sands with tears, bedewed the warriors’ arms; so great
a lord of fear they sorrowed for. And Peleus’ son led their loud wail,
laying his man-slaying hands on his comrade’s breast: “All hail,
Patroklos, even in the house of Hades; for all that I promised thee
before am I accomplishing, seeing I have dragged hither Hector to give
raw unto dogs to devour, and twelve noble children of the Trojans to
slaughter before thy pyre, because of mine anger at thy slaying.”

He said, and devised foul entreatment of noble Hector, stretching him
prone in the dust beside the bier of Menoitios’ son. And the rest put
off each his glittering bronze arms, and unyoked their high-neighing
horses, and sate them down numberless beside the ship of fleet-footed
Aiakides, and he gave them ample funeral feast. Many sleek oxen were
stretched out, their throats cut with steel, and many sheep and
bleating goats, and many white-tusked boars well grown in fat were
spitted to singe in the flame of Hephaistos; so on all sides round the
corpse in cupfuls blood was flowing.

But the fleet-footed prince, the son of Peleus, was brought to noble
Agamemnon by the Achaian chiefs, hardly persuading him thereto, for his
heart was wroth for his comrade. And when they were come to Agamemnon’s
hut, forthwith they bade clear-voiced heralds set a great tripod on the
fire, if haply they might persuade the son of Peleus to wash from him
the bloody gore. But he denied them steadfastly, and sware moreover an
oath: “Nay, verily by Zeus, who is highest and best of gods, not lawful
is it that water should come nigh my head or ever I shall have laid
Patroklos on the fire, and heaped a barrow, and shaved my hair, since
never again shall second grief thus reach my heart, while I remain
among the living. Yet now for the present let us yield us to our
mournful meal: but with the morning, O king of men Agamemnon, rouse the
folk to bring wood and furnish all that it beseemeth a dead man to have
when he goeth beneath the misty gloom, to the end that untiring fire
may burn him quickly from sight, and the host betake them to their
work.”

Thus spake he, and they listened readily to him and obeyed, and eagerly
making ready each his meal they supped, and no lack had their soul of
equal feast. But when they had put off from them the desire of meat and
drink, the rest went down each man to his tent to take his rest, but
the son of Peleus upon the beach of the sounding sea lay groaning
heavily, amid the host of Myrmidons, in an open place, where waves were
breaking on the shore. Now when sleep took hold on him, easing the
cares of his heart, deep sleep that fell about him, (for sore tired
were his glorious knees with onset upon Hector toward windy Ilios),
then came there unto him the spirit of hapless Patroklos, in all things
like his living self, in stature, and fair eyes, and voice, and the
raiment of his body was the same; and he stood above Achilles’ head and
spake to him: “Thou sleepest, and hast forgotten me, O Achilles. Not in
my life wast thou ever unmindful of me, but in my death. Bury me with
all speed, that I pass the gates of Hades. Far off the spirits banish
me, the phantoms of men outworn, nor suffer me to mingle with them
beyond the River, but vainly I wander along the wide-gated dwelling of
Hades. Now give me, I pray pitifully of thee, thy hand, for never more
again shall I come back from Hades, when ye have given me my due of
fire. Never among the living shall we sit apart from our dear comrades
and take counsel together, but me hath the harsh fate swallowed up
which was appointed me even from my birth. Yea and thou too thyself,
Achilles peer of gods, beneath the wall of the noble Trojans art doomed
to die. Yet one thing will I say, and charge thee, if haply thou wilt
have regard thereto. Lay not my bones apart from thine, Achilles, but
together, even as we were nurtured in your house, when Menoitios
brought me yet a little one from Opoeis to your country by reason of a
grievous man-slaying, on the day when I slew Amphidamas’ son, not
willing it, in childish wrath over the dice. Then took me the knight
Peleus into his house and reared me kindly and named me thy squire: so
therefore let one coffer hide our bones [a golden coffer, two handled,
thy lady mother’s gift].”

Then made answer unto him Achilles fleet of foot: “Wherefore, O my
brother, hast thou come hither, and chargest me everything that I
should do? Verily I will accomplish all, and have regard unto thy
bidding. But stand more nigh me; for one moment let us throw our arms
around each other, and take our fill of dolorous lament.”

He spake, and reached forth with his hands, but clasped him not; for
like a vapour the spirit was gone beneath the earth with a faint
shriek. And Achilles sprang up marvelling, and smote his hands
together, and spake a word of woe: “Ay me, there remaineth then even in
the house of Hades a spirit and phantom of the dead, albeit the life be
not anywise therein: for all night long hath the spirit of hapless
Patroklos stood over me, wailing and making moan, and charged me
everything that I should do, and wondrous like his living self it
seemed.”

Thus said he, and stirred in all of them yearning to make lament; and
rosy-fingered Morn shone forth on them while they still made moan
around the piteous corpse. Then lord Agamemnon sped mules and men from
all the huts to fetch wood; and a man of valour watched thereover, even
Meriones, squire of kindly Idomeneus. And they went forth with
wood-cutting axes in their hands and well-woven ropes, and before them
went the mules, and uphill and downhill and sideways and across they
went. But when they came to the spurs of many-fountained Ida,
straightway they set them lustily to hew high-foliaged oaks with the
long-edged bronze, and with loud noise fell the trees. Then splitting
them asunder the Achaians bound them behind the mules, and they tore up
the earth with their feet as they made for the plain through the thick
underwood. And all the wood-cutters bare logs; for thus bade Meriones,
squire of kindly Idomeneus. And on the Shore they threw them down in
line, where Achilles purposed a mighty tomb for Patroklos and for
himself.

Then when they had laid down all about great piles of wood, they sate
them down all together and abode. Then straightway Achilles bade the
warlike Myrmidons gird on their arms and each yoke the horses to his
chariot; and they arose and put their armour on, and mounted their
chariots, both fighting men and charioteers. In front were the men in
chariots, and a cloud of footmen followed after, numberless; and in the
midst his comrades bare Patroklos. And they heaped all the corpse with
their hair that they cut off and threw thereon; and behind did goodly
Achilles bear the head, sorrowing; for a noble comrade was he speeding
forth unto the realm of Hades.

And when they came to the place where Achilles had bidden them, they
set down the dead, and piled for him abundant wood. Then fleet-footed
noble Achilles bethought him of one thing more: standing apart from the
pyre he shore off a golden lock, the lock whose growth he nursed to
offer unto the River Spercheios, and sore troubled spake be, looking
forth over the wine-dark sea: “Spercheios, in other wise vowed my
father Peleus unto thee that I returning thither to my native land
should shear my hair for thee and offer a holy hecatomb, and fifty rams
should sacrifice there above thy springs, where is the sacred close and
altar burning spice. So vowed the old man, but thou hast not
accomplished him his desire. And now since I return not to my dear
native land, unto the hero Patroklos I may give this hair to take
away.”

Thus saying he set the hair in the hands of his dear comrade, and
stirred in all of them yearning to make lament. And so would the light
of the sun have gone down on their lamentation, had not Achilles said
quickly to Agamemnon as he stood beside him: “Son of Atreus—for to thy
words most will the host of the Achaians have regard—of lamentation
they may sate them to the full. But now disperse them from the burning
and bid them make ready their meal, and we to whom the dead is dearest
will take pains for these things; yet let the chiefs tarry nigh unto
us.”

Then when Agamemnon king of men heard that, he forthwith dispersed the
host among the trim ships, but the nearest to the dead tarried there
and piled the wood, and made a pyre a hundred feet this way and that,
and on the pyre’s top set the corpse, with anguish at their hearts. And
many lusty sheep and shambling crook-horned oxen they flayed and made
ready before the pyre; and taking from all of them the fat, great
hearted Achilles wrapped the corpse therein from head to foot, and
heaped the flayed bodies round. And he set therein two-handled jars of
honey and oil, leaning them against the bier; and four strong-necked
horses he threw swiftly on the pyre, and groaned aloud. Nine house-dogs
had the dead chief: of them did Achilles slay twain and throw them on
the pyre. And twelve valiant sons of great-hearted Trojans he slew with
the sword—for he devised mischief in his heart and he set to the
merciless might of the fire, to feed thereon. Then moaned he aloud, and
called on his dear comrade by his name: “All hail to thee, O Patroklos,
even in the house of Hades, for all that I promised thee before am I
now accomplishing. Twelve valiant sons of great-hearted Trojans, behold
these all in company with thee the fire devoureth: but Hector son of
Priam will I nowise give to the fire to feed upon, but to dogs.”

Thus spake he threatening, but no dogs might deal with Hector, for day
and night Aphrodite daughter of Zeus kept off the dogs, and anointed
him with rose-sweet oil ambrosial that Achilles might not tear him when
he dragged him. And over him Phoebus Apollo brought a dark cloud from
heaven to earth and covered all that place whereon the dead man lay,
lest meanwhile the sun’s strength shrivel his flesh round about upon
his sinews and limbs.

But the pyre of dead Patroklos kindled not. Then fleet-footed noble
Achilles had a further thought: standing aside from the pyre he prayed
to the two Winds of North and West, and promised them fair offerings,
and pouring large libations from a golden cup besought them to come,
that the corpses might blaze up speedily in the fire, and the wood make
haste to be enkindled. Then Iris, when she heard his prayer, went
swiftly with the message to the Winds. They within the house of the
gusty West Wind were feasting all together at meat, when Iris sped
thither, and halted on the threshold of stone. And when they saw her
with their eyes, they sprang up and called to her every one to sit by
him. But she refused to sit, and spake her word: “No seat for me; I
must go back to the streams of Ocean, to the Ethiopians’ land where
they sacrifice hecatombs to the immortal gods, that I too may feast at
their rites. But Achilles is praying the North Wind and the loud West
to come, and promising them fair offerings, that ye may make the pyre
be kindled whereon lieth Patroklos, for whom all the Achaians are
making moan.”

She having thus said departed, and they arose with a mighty sound,
rolling the clouds before them. And swiftly they came blowing over the
sea, and the wave rose beneath their shrill blast; and they came to
deep-soiled Troy, and fell upon the pile, and loudly roared the mighty
fire. So all night drave they the flame of the pyre together, blowing
shrill; and all night fleet Achilles, holding a two-handled cup, drew
wine from a golden bowl, and poured it forth and drenched the earth,
calling upon the spirit of hapless Patroklos. As a father waileth when
he burneth the bones of his son, new-married, whose death is woe to his
hapless parents, so wailed Achilles as he burnt the bones of his
comrade, going heavily round the burning pile, with many moans.

But at the hour when the Morning star goeth forth to herald light upon
the earth, the star that saffron-mantled Dawn cometh after, and
spreadeth over the salt sea, then grew the burning faint, and the flame
died down. And the Winds went back again to betake them home over the
Thracian main, and it roared with a violent swell. Then the son of
Peleus turned away from the burning and lay down wearied, and sweet
sleep leapt on him. But they who were with Atreus’ son gathered all
together, and the noise and clash of their approach aroused him; and he
sate upright and spake a word to them: “Son of Atreus and ye other
chiefs of the Achaians, first quench with gleaming wine all the burning
so far as the fire’s strength hath reached, and then let us gather up
the bones of Patroklos, Menoitios’ son, singling them well, and easy
are they to discern, for he lay in the middle of the pyre, while the
rest apart at the edge burnt-confusedly, horses and men. And his bones
let us put within a golden urn, and double-folded fat, until that I
myself be hidden in Hades. But no huge barrow I bid you toil to raise—a
seemly one, no more: then afterward do ye Achaians build it broad and
high, whosoever of you after I am gone may be left in the benched
ships.”

Thus spake he, and they hearkened to the fleet-footed son of Peleus.
First quenched they with gleaming wine the burning so far as the flame
went, and the ash had settled deep: then with lamentation they gathered
up the white bones of their gentle comrade into a golden urn and
double-folded fat, and placed the urn in the hut and covered it with a
linen veil. And they marked the circle of the barrow, and set the
foundations thereof around the pyre, and straightway heaped thereon a
heap of earth. Then when they had heaped up the barrow they were for
going back. But Achilles stayed the folk in that place, and made them
sit in wide assembly, and from his ships he brought forth prizes,
caldrons and tripods, and horses and mules and strong oxen, and
fair-girdled women, and grey iron.

First for fleet chariot-racers he ordained a noble prize, a woman
skilled in fair handiwork for the winner to lead home, and an eared
tripod that held two-and-twenty measures; these for the first man; and
for the second he ordained a six-year-old mare unbroke with a mule foal
in her womb; and for the third he gave a goodly caldron yet untouched
by fire, holding four measures, bright as when first made; and for the
fourth he ordained two talents of gold; and for the fifth a two-handled
urn untouched of fire, Then he stood up and spake a word among the
Argives: “Son of Atreus and ye other well-greaved Achaians, for the
chariot-racers these prizes lie awaiting them in the lists. If in some
other’s honour we Achaians were now holding our games, it would be I
who should win the first prize and bear it to my hut; for ye know how
far my pair of horses are first in excellence, for they are immortal
and Poseidon gave them to my father Peleus, and he again to me. But
verily I will abide, I and my whole-hooved horses, so glorious a
charioteer have they lost, and one so kind, who on their manes full
often poured smooth oil, when he had washed them in clear water. For
him they stand and mourn, and their manes are trailing on the ground,
and there stand they with sorrow at their hearts. But ye others
throughout the host get ye to your places, whosoever of the Achalans
hath trust in his horses and firm-jointed car.”

Thus spake the son of Peleus, and the fleet chariot-racers were
gathered. First of all arose up Eumelos king of men, Admetos’ son, a
skilful charioteer; and next to him arose Tydeus’ son, valiant
Diomedes, and yoked his horses of the breed of Tros, which on a time he
seized from Aineias, when Apollo saved their lord. And after him arose
Atreus’ son, fair-haired heaven-sprung Menelaos, and yoked him a swift
pair Aithe, Agamemnon’s mare, and his own horse Podargos. Her unto
Agamemnon did Anchises’ son Echepolos give in fee, that he might escape
from following him to windy Ilios and take his pleasure at home; for
great wealth had Zeus given him, and he dwelt in Sikyon of spacious
lawns:— so Menelaos yoked her, and she longed exceedingly for the race.
And fourth, Antilochos made ready his fair-maned horses, even the noble
son of Nestor, high-hearted king, who was the son of Neleus; and fleet
horses bred at Pylos drew his car. And his father standing by his side
spake counselling him to his profit, though himself was well advised:
“Antilochos, verily albeit thou art young, Zeus and Poseidon have loved
thee and taught thee all skill with horses; wherefore to teach thee is
no great need, for thou well knowest how to wheel round the post; yet
are thy horses very slow in the race: therefore methinks there will be
sad work for thee. For the horses of the others are fleeter, yet the
men know not more cunning than thou hast. So come, dear son, store thy
mind with all manner of cunning, that the prize escape thee not. By
cunning is a woodman far better than by force; by cunning doth a
helmsman on the wine-dark deep steer his swift ship buffeted by winds;
by cunning hath charioteer the better of charioteer. For whoso trusting
in his horses and car alone wheeleth heedlessly and wide at either end,
his horses swerve on the course, and he keepeth them not in hand. But
whoso is of crafty mind, though he drive worse horses, he ever keeping
his eye upon the post turneth closely by it, neither is unaware how far
at first to force his horses by the ox-hide reins, but holdeth them
safe in hand and watcheth the leader in the race. Now will I tell thee
a certain sign, and it shall not escape thee. A fathom’s height above
the ground standeth a withered stump, whether of oak or pine: it
decayeth not in the rain, and two white stones on either side thereof
are fixed at the joining of the track, and all round it is smooth
driving ground. Whether it be a monument of some man dead long ago, or
have been made their goal in the race by ancient men, this now is the
mark fixed by fleet-footed Achilles. Wherefore do thou drive close and
bear thy horses and chariot hard thereon, and lean thy body on the
well-knit car slightly to their left, and call upon the off-horse with
voice and lash, and give him rein from thy hand. But let the near horse
hug the post so that the nave of the well-wrought wheel seem to graze
it—yet beware of touching the stone, lest thou wound the horses and
break the chariot; so would that be triumph to the rest and reproach
unto thyself. But, dear son, be wise and on thy guard; for if at the
turning-post thou drive past the rest, there is none shall overtake
thee from behind or pass thee by, not though he drave the goodly Arion
in pursuit, the fleet horse of Adrastos, of divine descent, or the
horses of Laomedon, best of all bred in this land.”

Thus spake Neleian Nestor and sate him down again in his place, when he
had told his son the sum of every matter.

And Meriones was the fifth to make ready his sleek-coated steeds. Then
went they up into their chariots, and cast in the lots: and Achilles
shook them, and forth leapt the lot of Antilochos Nestor’s son, and the
next lot had lord Eumelos, and next to him the son of Atreus,
spear-famed Menelaos, and next to him drew Meriones his place; then
lastly Tydeides, far the best of all, drew his lot for his chariot’s
place. Then they stood side by side, and Achilles showed to them the
turning post, far off in the smooth plain; and beside it he placed an
umpire, godlike Phoinix, his father’s follower, that he might note the
running and tell the truth thereof.

Then all together lifted the lash above their steeds, and smote them
with the reins, and called on them eagerly with words: and they
forthwith sped swiftly over the plain, leaving the ships behind; and
beneath their breasts stood the rising dust like a cloud or whirlwind,
and their manes waved on the blowing wind. And the chariots ran
sometimes on the bounteous earth, and other whiles would bound into the
air. And the drivers stood in the cars, and the heart of every man beat
in desire of victory, and they called every man to his horses, that
flew amid their dust across the plain.

But when the fleet horses were now running the last part of the course,
back toward the grey sea, then was manifest the prowess of each, and
the horses strained in the race; and presently to the front rushed the
fleet mares of Pheres’ grandson, and next to them Diomedes’ stallions
of the breed of Tros, not far apart, but hard anigh, for they seemed
ever as they would mount Eumelos’ car, and with their breath his back
was warm and his broad shoulders, for they bent their heads upon him as
they flew along. Thus would Tydeus’ son have either outstripped the
other or made it a dead heat, had not Phoebus Apollo been wroth with
him and smitten from his hand the shining lash. Then from his eyes ran
tears of anger, for that he saw the mares still at speed, even
swiftlier than before, while his own horses were thrown out, as running
without spur. But Athene was not unaware of Apollo’s guile against
Tydeides, and presently sped after the shepherd of hosts, and gave him
back the lash, and put spirit into his steeds. Then in wrath after the
son of Admetos was the goddess gone, and brake his steeds’ yoke, and
the mares ran sideways off the course, and the pole was twisted to the
ground. And Eumelos was hurled out of the car beside the wheel, and his
elbows and mouth and nose were flayed, and his forehead bruised above
his eyebrows; and his eyes filled with tears and his lusty voice was
choked. Then Tydeides held his whole-hooved horses on one side, darting
far out before the rest, for Athene put spirit into his steeds and shed
glory on himself. Now next after him came golden-haired Menelaos
Atreus’ son. But Antilochos called to his father’s horses: “Go ye too
in, strain to your fleetest pace. Truly I nowise bid you strive with
those, the horses of wise Tydeides, unto which Athene hath now given
speed, and shed glory on their charioteer. But overtake Atreides’
horses with all haste, and be not outstripped by them, lest Aithe that
is but a mare pour scorn on you. Why are ye outstripped, brave steeds?
Thus will I tell you, and verily it shall be brought to pass—ye will
find no tendance with Nestor shepherd of hosts, but straightway he will
slay you with the edge of the sword if through heedlessness we win but
the worse prize. Have after them at your utmost speed, and I for my
part will devise a plan to pass them in the strait part of the course,
and this shall fail me not.”

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince ran swiftlier
some little while; and presently did the good warrior Antilochos espy a
strait place in a sunk part of the way. There was a rift in the earth,
where torrent water gathered and brake part of the track away, and
hollowed all the place; there drave Menelaos, shunning the encounter of
the wheels. But Antilochos turned his whole-hooved horses out of the
track, and followed him a little at one side. And the son of Atreus
took alarm and shouted to Antilochos: “Antilochos, thou art driving
recklessly—hold in thy horses! The road is straitened, soon thou mayest
pass me in a wider place, lest thou foul my chariot and undo us both.”

Thus spake he, but Antilochos drave even fiercelier than before, plying
his lash, as though he heard him not. As far as is the range of a disk
swung from the shoulder when a young man hurleth it, making trial of
his force, even so far ran they on; then the mares of Atreus’ son gave
back, for he ceased of himself to urge them on, lest the whole-hooved
steeds should encounter on the track, and overset the well-knit cars,
and the drivers fall in the dust in their zeal for victory. So
upbraiding Antilochos spake golden-haired Menelaos: “Antilochos, no
mortal man is more malicious than thou. Go thy mad way, since falsely
have we Achaians called thee wise. Yet even so thou shalt not bear off
the prize unchallenged to an oath.”

Thus saying he called aloud to his horses: “Hold ye not back nor stand
still with sorrow at heart. Their feet and knees will grow weary before
yours, for they both lack youth.”

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince sped faster on,
and were quickly close upon the others.

Now the Argives sitting in concourse were gazing at the horses, and
they came flying amid their dust over the plain. And the first aware of
them was Idomeneus, chief of the Cretans, for he was sitting outside
the concourse in the highest place of view, and when he heard the voice
of one that shouted, though afar off, he knew it; and he was aware of a
horse showing plainly in the front, a chestnut all the rest of him, but
in the forehead marked with a white star round like the moon. And he
stood upright and spoke among the Argives: “Friends, chiefs, and
counsellors of the Argives, is it I alone who see the horses, or do ye
also? A new pair seem to me now to be in front, and a new charioteer
appeareth; the mares which led in the outward course must have been
thrown out there in the plain. For I saw them turning first the hither
post, but now can see them nowhere, though my eyes are gazing
everywhere along the Trojan plain. Did the reins escape the charioteer
so that he could not drive aright round the post and failed in the
turn? There, methinks, must he have been cast forth, and have broken
his chariot, and the mares must have left the course, in the wildness
of their heart. But stand up ye too and look, for myself I discern not
certainly, but the first man seemeth to me one of Aitolian race, and he
ruleth among Argives, the son of horse-taming Tydeus, stalwart
Diomedes.”

Then fleet Aias Oileus’ son rebuked him in unseemly sort: “Idomeneus,
why art thou a braggart of old? As yet far off the high-stepping mares
are coursing over the wide plain. Neither art thou so far the youngest
among the Argives, nor do thy eyes look so far the keenliest from thy
head, yet continually braggest thou. It beseemeth thee not to be a
braggart, for there are here better men. And the mares leading are they
that led before, Eumelos’ mares, and he standeth and holdeth the reins
within the car.”

Then wrathfully in answer spake the chief of Cretans: “Aias, master of
railing, ill-counselled, in all else art thou behind other Argives, for
thy mind is unfriendly. Come then let us wager a tripod or caldron, and
make Agamemnon Atreus’ son our umpire, which mares are leading, that
thou mayest pay and learn.”

Thus said he, and straightway fleet Aias Oileus’ son arose angrily to
answer with harsh words: and strife between the twain would have gone
further, had not Achilles himself stood up and spake a word: “No longer
answer each other with harsh words, Aias and Idomeneus, ill words, for
it beseemeth not. Surely ye are displeased with any other who should do
thus. Sit ye in the concourse and keep your eyes upon the horses; soon
they in zeal for victory will come hither, and then shall ye know each
of you the Argives’ horses, which follow, and which lead.”

He said, and the son of Tydeus came driving up, and with his lash smote
now and again from the shoulder, and his horses were stepping high as
they sped swiftly on their way. And sprinklings of dust smote ever the
charioteer, and his chariot overlaid with gold and tin ran behind his
fleet-footed steeds, and small trace was there of the wheel-tires
behind in the fine dust, as they flew speeding on. Then he drew up in
the mid concourse, and much sweat poured from the horses’ heads and
chests to the ground. And Diomedes leapt to earth from the shining car,
and leant his lash against the yoke. Then stalwart Sthenelos tarried
not, but promptly took the prize, and gave to his proud comrades the
woman to lead and the eared tripod to bear away, and he loosed the
horses from the yoke.

And next after him drave Neleian Antilochos his horses, by craft, not
swiftness, having passed by Menelaos; yet even now Menelaos held his
swift steeds hard anigh. As far as a horse is from the wheel, which
draweth his master, straining with the car over the plain—his hindmost
tail-hairs touch the tire, for the wheel runneth hard anigh nor is much
space between, as he speedeth far over the plain—by so much was
Menelaos behind high-born Antilochos, howbeit at first he was a whole
disk-cast behind, but quickly he was catching Antilochos up, for the
high mettle of Agamemnon’s mare, sleek-coated Aithe, was rising in her.
And if yet further both had had to run he would have passed his rival
nor left it even a dead heat. But Meriones, stout squire of Idomeneus,
came in a spear-throw behind famous Menelaos, for tardiest of all were
his sleek-coated horses, and slowest he himself to drive a chariot in
the race. Last of them all came Admetos’ son, dragging his goodly car
driving his steeds in front. Him when fleet-footed noble Achilles
beheld he pitied him, and he stood up and spake winged words among the
Argives: “Last driveth his whole-hooved horses the best man of them
all. But come let us give him a prize, as is seemly, prize for the
second place, but the first let the son of Tydeus take.”

Thus spake he, and all applauded that he bade. And he would have given
him the mare, for the Achaians applauded, had not Antilochos, son of
great-hearted Nestor; risen up and answered Peleian Achilles on behalf
of his right: “O Achilles, I shall be sore angered with thee if thou
accomplish this word, for thou art minded to take away my prize,
because thou thinkest of how his chariot and fleet steeds miscarried,
and himself withal, good man though he be. Nay, it behoved him to pray
to the Immortals, then would he not have come in last of all in the
race. But if thou pitiest him and he be dear to thy heart, there is
much gold in thy hut, bronze is there and sheep, hand-maids are there
and whole-hooved horses. Thereof take thou and give unto him afterward
even a richer prize, or even now at once, that the Achaians may applaud
thee. But the mare I will not yield; for her let what man will essay
the battle at my hands.”

Thus spake he, and fleet-footed noble Achilles smiled, pleased with
Antilochos, for he was his dear comrade; and spake in answer to him
winged words: “Antilochos, if thou wouldst have me give Eumelos some
other thing beside from out my house, that also will I do. I will give
unto him a breast-plate that I took from Asteropaios, of bronze,
whereon a casting of bright tin is overlaid, and of great worth will it
be to him.” He said, and bade his dear comrade Automedon bring it from
the hut, and he went and brought it. [Then he placed it in Eumelos’
hands, and he received it gladly.]

But Menelaos also arose among them, sore at heart, angered exceedingly
against Antilochos; and the herald set the staff in his hand, and
called for silence among the Argives; then spake among them that
godlike man: “Antilochos, who once wert wise, what thing is this thou
hast done? Thou hast shamed my skill and made my horses fail, thrusting
thine own in front that are far worse. Come now, ye chiefs and
counsellors of the Argives, give judgment between us both, and favour
neither: lest some one of the mail-clad Achalans say at any time: ‘By
constraining Antilochos through false words hath Menelaos gone off with
the mare, for his horses were far worse, howbeit he hath advantage in
rank and power.’ Nay, I myself will bring the issue about, and I deem
that none other of the Danaans shall reproach me, for the trial shall
be just. Antilochos, fosterling of Zeus, come thou hither and as it is
ordained stand up before thy horses and chariot and take in thy hand
the pliant lash wherewith thou dravest erst, and touching thy horses
swear by the Enfolder and Shaker of the earth that not wilfully didst
thou hinder my chariot by guile.”

Then answered him wise Antilochos: “Bear with me now, for far younger
am I than thou, king Menelaos, and thou art before me and my better.
Thou knowest how a young man’s transgressions come about, for his mind
is hastier and his counsel shallow. So let thy heart suffer me, and I
will of myself give to thee the mare I have taken. Yea, if thou
shouldst ask some other greater thing from my house, I were fain to
give it thee straightway, rather than fall for ever from my place in
thy heart, O fosterling of Zeus, and become a sinner against the gods.”

Thus spake great-hearted Nestor’s son, and brought the mare and put her
in the hand of Menelaos. And his heart was gladdened as when the dew
cometh upon the ears of ripening harvest-corn, what time the fields are
bristling. So gladdened was thy soul, Menelaos, within thy heart. And
he spake unto Antilochos and uttered winged words: “Antilochos, now
will I of myself put away mine anger against thee, since no wise
formerly wert thou flighty or light-minded, howbeit now thy reason was
overcome of youthfulness. Another time be loth to outwit better men.
Not easily should another of the Achaians have persuaded me, but thou
hast suffered and toiled greatly, and thy brave father and brother, for
my sake: therefore will I hearken to thy prayer, and will even give
unto thee the mare, though she is mine, that these also may know that
my heart was never overweening or implacable.”

He said, and gave the mare to Noemon Antilochos’ comrade to lead away,
and then took the shining caldron. And Meriones took up the two talents
of gold in the fourth place, as he had come in. So the fifth prize was
left unclaimed, a two-handled cup; to Nester gave Achilles this,
bearing it to him through the concourse of Argives, and stood by him
and said: “Lo now for thee too, old man, be this a treasure, a memorial
of Patroklos’ burying; for no more shalt thou behold him among the
Argives. Now give I thee this prize unwon, for not in boxing shalt thou
strive, neither wrestle, nor enter on the javelin match, nor race with
thy feet; for grim old age already weigheth on thee.”

Thus saying he placed it in his hand, and Nestor received it gladly,
and spake unto him winged words: “Ay, truly all this, my son, thou hast
meetly said; for no longer are my limbs, friend, firm, nor my feet, nor
do my arms at all swing lightly from my shoulders either side. Would
that my youth were such and my force so firm as when the Epeians were
burying lord Amarynkes at Buprasion, and his sons held the king’s
funeral games. Then was no man found like me, neither of the Epeians
nor of the Pylians themselves or the great-hearted Aitolians. In boxing
I overcame Klytomedes, son of Enops, and in wrestling Ankaios of
Pleuron, who stood up against me, and in the foot-race I outran
Iphiklos, a right good man, and with the spear outthrew Phyleus and
Polydoros; only in the chariot-race the two sons of Aktor beat me [by
crowding their horses in front of me, jealous for victory, because the
chief prizes were left at home.] Now they were twins—one ever held the
reins, the reins he ever held, the other called on the horses with the
lash. Thus was I once, but now let younger men join in such feats; I
must bend to grievous age, but then was I of mark among heroes. But
come hold funeral for thy comrade too with with games. This gift do I
accept with gladness, and my heart rejoiceth that thou rememberest ever
my friendship to thee—(nor forget I thee)—and the honour wherewith it
is meet that I be honoured among the Achaians. And may the gods for
this grant thee due grace.”

Thus spake he, and Peleides was gone down the full concourse of
Achaians, when he had hearkened to all the thanks of Neleus’ son. Then
he ordained prizes of the violent boxing match; a sturdy mule he led
forth and tethered amid the assembly, a six-year mule unbroken, hardest
of all to break; and for the loser set a two-handled cup. Then he stood
up and spake a word among the Argives: “Son of Atreus and ye other
well-greaved Achaians, for these rewards we summon two men of the best
to lift up their hands to box amain. He to whom Apollo shall grant
endurance to the end, and all the Achaians acknowledge it, let him take
the sturdy mule and return with her to his hut; and the loser shall
take with him the two-handled-cup.”

Thus spake he, and forthwith arose a man great and valiant and skilled
in boxing, Epeios son of Panopeus, and laid his hand on the sturdy mule
and said aloud: “Let one come nigh to bear off the two-handled cup; the
mule I say none other of the Achaians shall take for victory with his
fists, for I claim to be the best man here. Sufficeth it not that I
fall short of you in battle? Not possible is it that in all arts a man
be skilled. Thus proclaim I, and it shall be accomplished: I will
utterly bruise mine adversary’s flesh and break his bones, so let his
friends abide together here to bear him forth when vanquished by my
hands.”

Thus spake he, and they all kept deep silence. And alone arose against
him Euryalos, a godlike man, son of king Mekisteus the son of Talaos,
Mekisteus, who came on a time to Thebes when Oedipus had fallen, to his
burial, and there he overcame all the sons of Kadmos. Thus Tydeides
famous with the spear made ready Euryalos for the fight, cheering him
with speech, and greatly desired for him victory. And first he cast
about him a girdle, and next gave him well-cut thongs of the hide of an
ox of the field. And the two boxers being girt went into the midst of
the ring, and both lifting up their stalwart hands fell to, and their
hands joined battle grievously. Then was there terrible grinding of
teeth, and sweat flowed from all their limbs. And noble Epeios came on,
and as the other spied for an opening, smote him on the cheek, nor
could he much more stand, for his limbs failed straightway under him.
And as when beneath the North Wind’s ripple a fish leapeth on a
tangle-covered beach, and then the black wave hideth it, so leapt up
Euryalos at that blow. But great-hearted Epeios took him in his hands
and set him upright, and his dear comrades stood around him, and led
him through the ring with trailing feet, spitting out clotted blood,
drooping his head awry, and they set him down in his swoon among them
and themselves went forth and fetched the two-handled cup.

Then Peleus’ son ordained straightway the prizes for a third contest,
offering them to the Danaans, for the grievous wrestling match: for the
winner a great tripod for standing on the fire, prized by the Achaians
among them at twelve oxens’ worth; and for the loser he brought a woman
into the midst, skilled in manifold work, and they prized her at four
oxen. And he stood up and spake a word among the Argives: “Rise, ye who
will essay this match.”

Thus said he, and there arose great Aias son of Telamon, and Odysseus
of many wiles stood up, the crafty-minded. And the twain being girt
went into the midst of the ring, and clasped each the other in his arms
with stalwart hands, like gable rafters of a lofty house which some
famed craftsman joineth, that he may baffle the wind’s force. And their
backs creaked, gripped firmly under the vigorous hands, and sweat ran
down in streams, and frequent weals along their ribs and shoulders
sprang up, red with blood, while ever they strove amain for victory, to
win the wrought tripod. Neither could Odysseus trip Aias and bear him
to the ground, nor Aias him, for Odysseus’ strength withheld him. But
when they began to irk the well-greaved Achaians, then said to Odysseus
great Aias, Telamon’s son: “Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of
many wiles, or lift thou me, or I will thee, and the issue shall be
with Zeus.”

Having thus said he lifted him, but Odysseus was not unmindful of his
craft. He smote deftly from behind the hollow of Aias’ knee, and loosed
his limbs, and threw him down backward, and Odysseus fell upon his
chest, and the folk gazed and marvelled. Then in his turn much-enduring
noble Odysseus tried to lift, and moved him a little from the ground,
but lifted him not, so he crooked his knee within the other’s, and both
fell on the ground nigh to each other, and were soiled with dust, And
now starting up again a third time would they have wrestled, had not
Achilles himself arisen and held them back: “No longer press each the
other, nor wear you out with pain. Victory is with both; take equal
prizes and depart, that other Achaians may contend.”

Thus spake he, and they were fain to hear and to obey, and wiped the
dust from them and put their doublets on.

Then straightway the son of Peleus set forth other prizes for fleetness
of foot; a mixing-bowl of silver, chased; six measures it held, and in
beauty it was far the best in all the earth, for artificers of Sidon
wrought it cunningly, and men of the Phoenicians brought it over the
misty sea, and landed it in harbour, and gave it a gift to Thoas; and
Euneos son of Jason gave it to the hero Patroklos a ransom for Lykaon
Priam’s son. Now this cup did Achilles set forth as a prize in honour
of his friend, for whoso should be fleetest in speed of foot. For the
second he set an ox great and very fat, and for the last prize half a
talent of gold. And he stood up and spake a word among the Argives:
“Rise, ye who will essay this match.”

Thus spake he, and straightway arose fleet Aias Oileus’ son, and
Odysseus of many wiles, and after them Nestor’s son Antilochos, for he
was best of all the youth in the foot-race. Then they stood side by
side, and Achilles showed to them the goal. Right eager was the running
from the start, but Oileus’ son forthwith shot to the front, and close
behind him came noble Odysseus, as close as is a weaving-rod to a
fair-girdled woman’s breast when she pulleth it deftly with her hands,
drawing the spool along the warp, and holdeth the rod nigh her breast—
so close ran Odysseus behind Aias and trod in his footsteps or ever the
dust had settled there, and on his head fell the breath of noble
Odysseus as he ran ever lightly on, and all the Achaians applauded his
struggle for the victory and called on him as he laboured hard. But
when they were running the last part of the course, forthwith Odysseus
prayed in his soul to bright-eyed Athene: “Hearken, goddess, come thou
a good helper of my feet.”

Thus prayed he, and Pallas Athene hearkened to him, and made his limbs
feel light, both feet and hands. But when they, were now nigh darting
on the prize, then Aias slipped as he ran, for Athene marred his race,
where filth was strewn from the slaughter of loud-bellowing oxen that
fleet Achilles slew in honour of Patroklos: and Aias’ mouth and
nostrils were filled with that filth of oxen. So much-enduring noble
Odysseus, as he came in first, took up the mixing-bowl, and famous Aias
took the ox. And he stood holding in his hand the horn of the ox of the
field, sputtering away the filth, and spake among the Argives: “Out on
it, it was the goddess who marred my running, she who from of old like
a mother standeth by Odysseus’ side and helpeth him.”

So spake he, but they all laughed pleasantly to behold him. Then
Antilochos smiling bore off the last prize, and spake his word among
the Argives: “Friends, ye will all bear me witness when I say that even
herein also the immortals favour elder men. For Aias is a little older
than I, but Odysseus of an earlier generation and earlier race of men.
A green old age is his, they say, and hard were it for any Achaian to
rival him in speed, save only Achilles.”

Thus spake he, and gave honour to the fleet son of Peleus. And Achilles
answered him and said: “Antilochos, not unheeded shall thy praise be
given; a half-talent of gold I will give thee over and above.” He said,
and set it in his hands, and Antilochos received it gladly.

Then Peleus’ son brought and set in the ring a far-shadowing spear and
a chaldron that knew not the fire, an ox’s worth, embossed with
flowers; and men that were casters of the javelin arose up. There rose
Atreus’ son wide-ruling Agamemnon, and Meriones, Idomeneus’ brave
squire. And swift-footed noble Achilles spake among them: “Son of
Atreus, for that we know how far thou excellest all, and how far the
first thou art in the might of thy throw, take thou this prize with
thee to the hollow ships, and to the hero Meriones let us give the
spear, if thou art willing in thy heart: thus I at least advise.”

Thus spake he, nor disregarded him Agamemnon king of men. So to
Meriones he gave the spear of bronze, but to the herald Talthybios the
hero gave the goodliest prize.




BOOK XXIV.


How the body of Hector was ransomed, and of his funeral.


Then the assembly was broken up, and the tribes were scattered to
betake them each to their own swift ships. The rest bethought them of
supper and sweet sleep to have joy thereof; but Achilles wept,
remembering his dear comrade, nor did sleep that conquereth all take
hold on him, but he kept turning him to this side and to that, yearning
for Patroklos’ manhood and excellent valour, and all the toils he
achieved with him and the woes he bare, cleaving the battles of men and
the grievous waves. As he thought thereon be shed big tears, now lying
on his side, now on his back, now on his face; and then anon he would
arise upon his feet and roam wildly beside the beach of the salt sea.
Nor would he be unaware of the Dawn when she arose over the sea and
shores. But when he had yoked the swift steeds to his car he would bind
Hector behind his chariot to drag him withal; and having thrice drawn
him round the barrow of the dead son of Menoitios he rested again in
his hut, and left Hector lying stretched on his face in the dust. But
Apollo kept away all defacement from his flesh, for he had pity on him
even in death, and covered him all with his golden aegis, that Achilles
might not tear him when he dragged him.

Thus Achilles in his anger entreated noble Hector shamefully; but the
blessed gods when they beheld him pitied him, and urged the
clear-sighted slayer of Argus to steal the corpse away. So to all the
others seemed it good, yet not to Hera or Poseidon or the bright-eyed
Maiden, but they continued as when at the beginning sacred Ilios became
hateful to them, and Priam and his people, by reason of the sin of
Alexandros in that he contemned those goddesses when they came to his
steading, and preferred her who brought him deadly lustfulness. But
when the twelfth morn from that day arose, then spake among the
Immortals Phoebus Apollo: “Hard of heart are ye, O gods, and cruel Hath
Hector never burnt for you thigh-bones of unblemished bulls and goats?
Now have ye not taken heart to rescue even his corpse for his wife to
look upon and his mother and his child and his father Priam and his
people, who speedily would burn him in the fire and make his funeral.
But fell Achilles, O gods, ye are fain to abet, whose mind is nowise
just nor the purpose in his breast to be turned away, but he is cruelly
minded as a lion that in great strength and at the bidding of his proud
heart goeth forth against men’s flocks to make his meal; even thus
Achilles hath cast out pity, neither hath he shame, that doth both harm
and profit men greatly. It must be that many a man lose even some
dearer one than was this, a brother of the same womb born or perchance
a son; yet bringeth he his wailing and lamentation to an end, for an
enduring soul have the Fates given unto men. But Achilles after
bereaving noble Hector of his life bindeth him behind his horses and
draggeth him around the tomb of his dear comrade: not, verily, is that
more honourable or better for him. Let him take heed lest we wax wroth
with him, good man though he be, for in his fury he is entreating
shamefully the senseless clay.”

Then in anger spake unto him white-armed Hera: “Even thus mightest thou
speak, O Lord of the silver bow, if ye are to give equal honour to
Achilles and to Hector. Hector is but a mortal and was suckled at a
woman’s breast, but Achilles is child of a goddess whom I myself bred
up and reared and gave to a man to be his wife, even to Peleus who was
dearest of all men to the Immortals’ heart. And all ye gods came to her
bridal, and thou among them wert feasting with thy lyre, O lover of ill
company, faithless ever.”

Then to her in answer spake Zeus who gathereth the clouds: “Hera, be
not wroth utterly with the gods: for these men’s honour is not to be
the same, yet Hector also was dearest to the gods of all mortals that
are in Ilios. So was he to me at least, for nowise failed he in the
gifts I loved. Never did my altar lack seemly feast, drink-offering and
the steam of sacrifice, even the honour that falleth to our due. But
verily we will say no more of stealing away brave Hector, for it cannot
be hidden from Achilles, for his mother abideth ever nigh to him night
and day. But I were fain that some one of the gods would call Thetis to
come near to me, that I may speak unto her a wise word, so that
Achilles may take gifts from Priam and give Hector back.” Thus spake
he, and airy-footed Iris sped forth upon the errand and between
Samothrace and rocky Imbros leapt into the black sea, and the waters
closed above her with a noise. And she sped to the bottom like a weight
of lead that mounted on horn of a field-ox goeth down bearing death to
ravenous fishes. And she found Thetis in a hollow cave; about her sat
gathered other goddesses of the seas and she in their midst was wailing
for the fate of her noble son who must perish in deep-soiled Troy, far
from his native land. And standing near, fleet-footed Iris spake to
her: “Rise, Thetis; Zeus of immortal counsels calleth thee.”

And to her made answer Thetis the silver-footed goddess: “Wherefore
biddeth me that mighty god? I shrink from mingling among the Immortals,
for I have countless woes at heart. Yet go I, nor shall his word be in
vain, whatsoever he saith.”

Thus having said the noble goddess took to her a dark-hued robe, no
blacker raiment was there found than that. Then she went forth, and
wind-footed swift Iris led the way before her, and around them the
surge of the sea was sundered. And when they had come forth upon the
shore they sped up to heaven, and found the far-seeing son of Kronos,
and round him sat gathered all the other blessed gods that are for
ever. Then she sat down beside father Zeus, and Athene gave her place.
And Hera set a fair golden cup in her hand and cheered her with words,
and Thetis drank, and gave back the cup. Then began speech to them the
father of gods and men: “Thou art come to Olympus, divine Thetis, in
thy sorrow, with violent grief at thy heart; I know it of myself.
Nevertheless will I tell thee wherefore I called thee hither. Nine days
hath dispute arisen among the Immortals concerning the corpse of Hector
and Achilles waster of cities. Fain are they to send clear-sighted
Hermes to steal the body away, but now hear what glory I accord herein
to Achilles, that I may keep through times to come thy honour and good
will. Go with all speed to the host and bear to thy son my bidding. Say
to him that the gods are displeased at him, and that I above all
Immortals am wroth, because with furious heart be holdeth Hector at the
beaked ships and hath not given him back, if haply he may fear me and
give Hector back. But I will send Iris to great-hearted Priam to bid
him go to the ships of the Achaians to ransom his dear son, and carry
gifts to Achilles that may gladden his heart.”

Thus spake he, and Thetis the silver-footed goddess was not disobedient
to his word, and sped darting upon her way down from the peaks of
Olympus. And she came to her son’s hut; there found she him making
grievous moan, and his dear comrades round were swiftly making ready
and furnishing their early meal, and a sheep great and fleecy was being
sacrificed in the hut. Then his lady-mother sate her down close beside
him, and stroked him with her hand and spake to him by his name: “My
child, how long with lamentation and woe wilt thou devour thine heart,
taking thought of neither food nor rest? good were even a woman’s
embrace, for not long shalt thou be left alive to me; already death and
forceful fate are standing nigh thee. But hearken forthwith unto me,
for I am the messenger of Zeus to thee. He saith that the gods are
displeased at thee, and that himself above all Immortals is wroth,
because with furious heart thou holdest Hector at the beaked ships and
hast not given him back. But come restore him, and take ransom for the
dead.”

Then to her in answer spake fleet-footed Achilles: “So be it: whoso
bringeth ransom let him take back the dead, if verily with heart’s
intent the Olympian biddeth it himself.”

So they in the assembly of the ships, mother and son, spake to each
other many winged words. But the son of Kronos thus bade Iris go to
holy Ilios: “Go forth, fleet Iris, leave the abode of Olympus and bear
my message within Ilios to great-hearted Priam that he go to the ships
of the Achaians and ransom his dear son and carry gifts to Achilles
that may gladden his heart; let him go alone, and no other man of the
Trojans go with him. Only let some elder herald attend on him to guide
the mules and smooth-wheeled waggon and carry back to the city the dead
man whom noble Achilles slew. Let not death be in his thought nor any
fear; such guide will we give unto him, even the slyer of Argus who
shall lead him until his leading bring him to Achilles. And when he
shall have led him within the hut, neither shall Achilles himself slay
him nor suffer any other herein, for not senseless is he or
unforeseeing or wicked, but with all courtesy he will spare a suppliant
man.”

Thus spake he, and airy-footed Iris sped forth upon the errand. And she
came to the house of Priam, and found therein crying and moan. His
children sitting around their father within the court were bedewing
their raiment with their tears, and the old man in their midst was
close wrapped all over in his cloak; and on his head and neck was much
mire that he had gathered in his hands as he grovelled upon the earth.
And his daughters and his sons’ wives were wailing throughout the
house, bethinking them of all those valiant men who had lost their
lives at the hands of the Argives and were lying low. And the messenger
of Zeus stood beside Priam and spake softly unto him, and trembling
came upon his limbs: “Be of good cheer in thy heart, O Priam son of
Dardanos, and be not dismayed for anything, for no evil come I hither
to forebode to thee, but with good will. I am the messenger of Zeus to
thee, who, though he be afar off, hath great care and pity for thee.
The Olympian biddeth thee ransom noble Hector and carry gifts to
Achilles that may gladden his heart: go thou alone, let none other of
the Trojans go with thee. Only let some elder herald attend on thee to
guide the mules and the smooth-wheeled waggon to carry back to the city
the dead man whom noble Achilles slew. Let not death be in thy thought,
nor any fear; such guide shall go with thee, even the slayer of Argus,
who shall lead thee until his leading bring thee to Achilles. And when
he shall have led thee into the hut, neither shall Achilles himself
slay thee, nor suffer any other herein, for not senseless is he or
unforeseeing or wicked, but with all courtesy he will spare a suppliant
man.”

Thus having spoken fleet Iris departed from him; and he bade his sons
make ready the smooth-wheeled mule waggon, and bind the wicker carriage
thereon. And himself he went down to his fragrant chamber, of cedar
wood, high-roofed, that held full many jewels: and to Hekabe his wife
he called and spake: “Lady, from Zeus hath an Olympian messenger come
to me, that I go to the ships of the Achaians and ransom my dear son,
and carry gifts to Achilles that may gladden his heart. Come tell me
how seemeth it to thy mind, for of myself at least my desire and heart
bid me mightily to go thither to the ships and enter the wide camp of
the Achaians.”

Thus spake he, but his wife lamented aloud and made answer to him: “Woe
is me, whither is gone thy mind whereby aforetime thou wert famous
among stranger men and among them thou rulest? How art thou fain to go
alone to the ships of the Achaians, to meet the eyes of the man who
hath slain full many of thy brave sons? of iron verily is thy heart.
For if he light on thee and behold thee with his eyes, a savage and
ill-trusted man is this, and he will not pity thee, neither reverence
thee at all. Nay, now let us sit in the hall and make lament afar off.
Even thus did forceful Fate erst spin for Hector with her thread at his
beginning when I bare him, even I, that he should glut fleet-footed
dogs, far from his parents, in the dwelling of a violent man whose
inmost vitals I were fain to fasten and feed upon; then would his deeds
against my son be paid again to him, for not playing the coward was he
slain of him, but championing the men and deep-bosomed women of Troy,
neither bethought he him of shelter or of flight.”

The to her in answer spake the old man godlike Priam: “Stay me not, for
I am fain to go, neither be thyself a bird of ill boding in my halls,
for thou wilt not change my mind. Were it some other and a child of
earth that bade me this, whether some seer or of the priests that
divine from sacrifice, then would we declare it false and have no part
therein; but now, since I have heard the voice of the goddess myself
and looked upon her face, I will go forth, and her word shall not be
void. And if it be my fate to die by the ships of the mail-clad
Achaians, so would I have it; let Achilles slay me with all speed, when
once I have taken in my arms my son, and have satisfied my desire with
moan.”

He spake, and opened fair lids of chests wherefrom he chose twelve very
goodly women’s robes and twelve cloaks of single fold and of coverlets
a like number and of fair sheets, and of doublets thereupon. And he
weighed and brought forth talents of gold ten in all, and two shining
tripods and four caldrons, and a goblet exceeding fair that men of
Thrace had given him when he went thither on an embassy, a chattel of
great price, yet not that even did the old man grudge from his halls,
for he was exceeding fain at heart to ransom his dear son. Then he
drave out all the Trojans from the colonnade, chiding them with words
of rebuke: “Begone, ye that dishonour and do me shame! Have ye no
mourning of your own at home that ye come to vex me here? Think ye it a
small thing that Zeus Kronos’ son hath given me this sorrow, to lose
him that was the best man of my sons? Nay, but ye too shall feel it,
for easier far shall ye be to the Achaians to slay now he is dead. But
for me, ere I behold with mine eyes the city sacked and wasted, let me
go down into the house of Hades.”

He said, and with his staff chased forth the men, and they went forth
before the old man in his haste. Then he called unto his sons, chiding
Helenos and Paris and noble Agathon and Pammon and Antiphonos, and
Polites of the loud war-cry, and Deiphobos and Hippothoos and proud
Dios; nine were they whom the old man called and bade unto him: “Haste
ye, ill sons, my shame; would that ye all in Hector’s stead had been
slain at the swift ships! Woe is me all unblest, since I begat sons the
best men in wide Troy-land, but none of them is left for me to claim,
neither godlike Mestor, nor Troilos with his chariot of war, nor Hector
who was a god among men, neither seemed he as the son of a mortal man
but of a god:—all these hath Ares slain, and here are my shames all
left to me, false-tongued, light-heeled, the heroes of dance,
plunderers of your own people’s sheep and kids. Will ye not make me
ready a wain with all speed, and lay all these thereon, that we get us
forward on our way?”

Thus spake he, and they fearing their father’s voice brought forth the
smooth-running mule chariot, fair and new, and bound the body thereof
on the frame; and from its peg they took down the mule yoke, a boxwood
yoke with knob well fitted with guiding-rings; and they brought forth
the yoke-band of nine cubits with the yoke. The yoke they set firmly on
the polished pole on the rest at the end thereof, and slipped the ring
over the upright pin, which with three turns of the band they lashed to
the knob, and then belayed it close round the pole and turned the
tongue thereunder. Then they brought from the chamber and heaped on the
polished wain the countless ransom of Hector’s head, and yoked
strong-hooved harness mules, which on a time the Mysians gave to Priam,
a splendid gift. But to Priam’s car they yoked the horses that the old
man kept for his use and reared at the polished crib.

Thus in the high palace were Priam and the herald letting yoke their
cars, with wise thoughts at their hearts, when nigh came Hekabe sore at
heart, with honey-sweet wine in her right hand in a golden cup that
they might make libation ere they went. And she stood before the horses
and spake a word to Priam by name: “Lo now make libation to father Zeus
and pray that thou mayest come back home from among the enemy, since
thy heart speedeth thee forth to the ships, though fain were I thou
wentest not. And next pray to Kronion of the Storm-cloud, the gods of
Ida, that beholdeth all Troy-land beneath, and ask of him a bird of
omen, even the swift messenger that is dearest of all birds to him and
of mightiest strength, to appear upon thy right, that seeing the sign
with thine own eyes thou mayest go in trust thereto unto the ships of
the fleet-horsed Danaans. But if far-seeing Zeus shall not grant unto
thee his messenger, I at least shall not bid thee on to go among the
ships of the Achaians how fain soever thou mayest be.”

Then answered and spake unto her godlike Priam: “Lady, I will not
disregard this hest of thine, for good it is to lift up hands to Zeus,
if haply he will have pity.”

Thus spake the old man, and bade a house-dame that served him pour pure
water on his hands; and she came near to serve him with water in a ewer
to wash withal. And when he had washed his hands he took a goblet from
his wife: then he stood in the midst of the court and prayed and poured
forth wine as he looked up to heaven, and spake a word aloud: “Father
Zeus that bearest sway from Ida, most glorious and most great, grant
that I find welcome and pity under Achilles’ roof, and send a bird of
omen, even the swift messenger that is dearest of all birds to thee and
of mightiest strength, to appear upon the right, that seeing this sign
with mine eyes I may go trusting therein unto the ships of the
fleet-horsed Danaans.”

Thus spake he praying, and Zeus of wise counsels hearkened unto him,
and straightway sent forth an eagle, surest omen of winged birds, the
dusky hunter called of men the Black Eagle. Wide as the door, well
locking, fitted close, of some rich man’s high-roofed hall, so wide
were his wings either way; and he appeared to them speeding on the
right hand above the city. And when they saw the eagle they rejoiced
and all their hearts were glad within their breasts.

Then the old man made haste to go up into his car, and drave forth from
the doorway and the echoing portico. In front the mules drew the
four-wheeled wain, and wise Idaios drave them; behind came the horses
which the old man urged with the lash at speed along the city: and his
friends all followed lamenting loud as though he were faring to his
death. And when they were come down from the city and were now on the
plain, then went back again to Ilios his sons and marriage kin. But the
two coming forth upon the plain were not unbeheld of far-seeing Zeus.
But he looked upon the old man and had compassion on him, and
straightway spake unto Hermes his dear son: “Hermes, since unto thee
especially is it dear to companion men, and thou hearest whomsoever
thou wilt, go forth and so guide Priam to the hollow ships of the
Achaians that no man behold or be aware of him, among all the Danaans’
host, until he come to the son of Peleus.”

Thus spake he, and the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, was not
disobedient unto his word. Straightway beneath his feet he bound on his
fair sandals, golden, divine, that bare him over wet sea and over the
boundless land with the breathings of the wind. And he took up his wand
wherewith he entranceth the eyes of such men as he will, and others he
likewise waketh out of sleep: this did the strong slayer of Argus take
in his hand, and flew. And quickly came he to Troy-land and the
Hellespont, and went on his way in semblance as a young man that is a
prince, with the new down on his chin, as when the youth of men is the
comeliest.

Now the others, when they had driven beyond the great barrow of Ilios,
halted the mules and horses at the river to drink; for darkness was
come down over the earth. Then the herald beheld Hermes from hard by,
and marked him, and spake and said to Priam: “Consider, son of
Dardanos; this is matter of prudent thought. I see a man, methinks we
shall full soon be rent in pieces. Come, let us flee in our chariot, or
else at least touch his knees and entreat him that he have mercy on
us.”

Thus spake he, and the old man was confounded, and he was dismayed
exceedingly, and the hair on his pliant limbs stood up, and he stood
still amazed. But the Helper came nigh of himself and took the old
man’s hand, and spake and questioned him: “Whither, father, dost thou
thus guide these horses and mules through the divine night, when other
mortals are asleep? Hadst thou no fear of the fierce-breathing
Achaians, thy bitter foes that are hard anigh thee? If one of them
should espy thee carrying such treasures through the swift black night,
what then would be thy thought? Neither art thou young thyself, and thy
companion here is old, that ye should make defence against a man that
should assail thee first. But I will no wise harm thee, yea I will keep
any other from thy hurt: for the similitude of my dear father I see in
thee.”

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam: “Even so, kind
son, are all these things as thou sayest. Nevertheless hath some god
stretched forth his hand even over me in that he hath sent a wayfarer
such as thou to meet me, a bearer of good luck, by the nobleness of thy
form and semblance; and thou art wise of heart and of blessed parents
art thou sprung.”

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: “All this,
old sire, hast thou verily spoken aright. But come say this and tell me
truly whether thou art taking forth a great and goodly treasure unto
alien men, where it may abide for thee in safety, or whether by this ye
are all forsaking holy Ilios in fear; so far the best man among you
hath perished, even thy son; for of battle with the Achaians abated he
never a jot.”

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam, “Who art thou,
noble sir, and of whom art born? For meetly hast thou spoken of the
fate of my hapless son.”

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: “Thou art
proving me, old sire, in asking me of noble Hector. Him have I full oft
seen with mine eyes in glorious battle, and when at the ships he was
slaying the Argives he drave thither, piercing them with the keen
bronze, and we stood still and marvelled thereat, for Achilles suffered
us not to fight, being wroth against Atreus’ son. His squire am I, and
came in the same well-wrought ship. From the Myrmidons I come, and my
father is Polyktor. Wealthy is he, and an old man even as thou, and six
other sons hath he, and I am his seventh. With the others I cast lots,
and it fell to me to fare hither with the host. And now am I come from
the ships to the plain, for at day-break the glancing-eyed Achaians
will set the battle in array around the town. For it chafeth them to be
sitting here, nor can the Achaian lords hold in their fury for the
fray.”

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: “If verily thou
art a squire of Achilles Peleus’ son, come tell me all the truth,
whether still my son is by the ships, or whether ere now Achilles hath
riven him limb from limb and cast him to the dogs.”

Then to him again spake the Messenger the slayer of Argus: “Old sire,
not yet have dogs or birds devoured him, but there lieth he still by
Achilles’ ship, even as he fell, among the huts, and the twelfth morn
now hath risen upon him, nor doth his flesh corrupt at all, neither
worms consume it, such as devour men slain in war. Truly Achilles
draggeth him recklessly around the barrow of his dear comrade so oft as
divine day dawneth, yet marreth he him not; thou wouldst marvel if thou
couldst go see thyself how dewy fresh he lieth, and is washed clean of
blood, nor anywhere defiled; and all his wounds wherewith he was
stricken are closed; howbeit many of thy son, though he be but a dead
corpse, for they held him dear at heart.”

Thus spake he, and the old man rejoiced, and answered him, saying: “My
son, it is verily a good thing to give due offerings withal to the
Immortals, for never did my child—if that child indeed I had—forget in
our halls the gods who inhabit Olympus. Therefore have they remembered
this for him, albeit his portion is death. But come now take from me
this goodly goblet, and guard me myself and guide me, under Heaven,
that I may come unto the hut of Peleus’ son.”

Then spake unto him again the Messenger the slayer of Argus: “Thou art
proving me, old sire, who am younger than thou, but thou wilt not
prevail upon me, in that thou biddest me take gifts from thee without
Achilles’ privity. I were afraid and shamed at heart to defraud him,
lest some evil come to pass on me hereafter. But as thy guide I would
go even unto famous Argos, accompanying thee courteously in swift ship
or on foot. Not from scorn of thy guide would any assail thee then.”

Thus spake the Helper, and leaping on the chariot behind the horses he
swiftly took lash and reins into his hand, and breathed brave spirit
into horses and mules. But when they were come to the towers and trench
of the ships, there were the sentinels just busying them about their
supper. Then the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, shed sleep upon them
all, and straightway opened the gates and thrust back the bars, and
brought within Priam and the splendid gifts upon his wain. And they
came to the lofty hut of the son of Peleus, which the Myrmidons made
for their king and hewed therefor timber of the pine, and thatched it
with downy thatching-rush that they mowed in the meadows, and around it
made for him their lord a great court with close-set palisades; and the
door was barred by a single bolt of pine that three Achaians wont to
drive home, and three drew back that mighty bar—three of the rest, but
Achilles by himself would drive it home. Then opened the Helper Hermes
the door for the old man, and brought in the splendid gifts for Peleus’
fleet-footed son, and descended from the chariot to the earth and spake
aloud: “Old sire, I that have come to thee am an immortal god, even
Hermes, for my father sent me to companion thee on thy way. But now
will I depart from thee nor come within Achilles’ sight; it were cause
of wrath that an immortal god should thus show favour openly unto
mortals. But thou go in and clasp the knees of Peleus’ son and entreat
him for his father’s sake and his mother’s of the lovely hair and for
his child’s sake that thou mayest move his soul.”

Thus Hermes spake, and departed unto high Olympus. But Priam leapt from
the car to the earth, and left Idaios in his place; he stayed to mind
the horses and mules; but the old man made straight for the house where
Achilles dear to Zeus was wont to sit. And therein he found the man
himself, and his comrades sate apart: two only, the hero Automedon and
Alkimos, of the stock of Ares, were busy in attendance; and he was
lately ceased from meat, even from eating and drinking: and still the
table stood beside him. But they were unaware of great Priam as he came
in, and so stood he anigh and clasped in his hands the knees of
Achilles, and kissed his hands, terrible, man-slaying, that slew many
of Priam’s sons. And as when a grievous curse cometh upon a man who in
his own country hath slain another and escapeth to a land of strangers,
to the house of some rich man, and wonder possesseth them that look on
him—so Achilles wondered when he saw godlike Priam, and the rest
wondered likewise, and looked upon one another. Then Priam spake and
entreated him, saying: “Bethink thee, O Achilles like to gods, of thy
father that is of like years with me, on the grievous pathway of old
age. Him haply are the dwellers round about entreating evilly, nor is
there any to ward from him ruin and bane. Nevertheless while he heareth
of thee as yet alive he rejoiceth in his heart, and hopeth withal day
after day that he shall see his dear son returning from Troy-land. But
I, I am utterly unblest, since I begat sons the best men in wide
Troy-land, but declare unto thee that none of them is left. Fifty I
had, when the sons of the Achaians came; nineteen were born to me of
one mother, and concubines bare the rest within my halls. Now of the
more part had impetuous Ares unstrung the knees, and he who was yet
left and guarded city and men, him slewest thou but now as he fought
for his country, even Hector. For his sake come I unto the ships of the
Achaians that I may win him back from thee, and I bring with me untold
ransom. Yea, fear thou the gods, Achilles, and have compassion on me,
even me, bethinking thee of thy father. Lo, I am yet more piteous than
he, and have braved what none other man on earth hath braved before, to
stretch forth my hand toward the face of the slayer of my sons.”

Thus spake he, and stirred within Achilles desire to make lament for
his father. And he touched the old man’s hand and gently moved him
back. And as they both bethought them of their dead, so Priam for
man-slaying Hector wept sore as he was fallen before Achilles’ feet,
and Achilles wept for his own father, and now again for Patroklos, and
their moan went up throughout the house. But when noble Achilles had
satisfied him with lament, and the desire thereof departed from his
heart and limbs, straightway he sprang from his seat and raised the old
man by his hand, pitying his hoary head and hoary beard, and spake unto
him winged words and said: “Ah hapless! many ill things verily thou
hast endured in thy heart. How durst thou come alone to the ships of
the Achaians and to meet the eyes of the man who hath slain full many
of the brave sons? of iron verily is thy heart. But come then set thee
on a seat, and we will let our sorrows lie quiet in our hearts for all
our pain, for no avail cometh of chill lament. This is the lot the gods
have spun for miserable men, that they should live in pain; yet
themselves are sorrowless. For two urns stand upon the floor of Zeus
filled with his evil gifts, and one with blessings. To whomsoever Zeus
whose joy is in the lightning dealeth a mingled lot, that man chanceth
now upon ill and now again on good, but to whom he giveth but of the
bad kind him he bringeth to scorn, and evil famine chaseth him over the
goodly earth, and he is a wanderer honoured of neither gods nor men.
Even thus to Peleus gave the gods splendid gifts from his birth, for he
excelled all men in good fortune and wealth, and was king of the
Myrmidons, and mortal though he was the gods gave him a goddess to be
his bride. Yet even on him God brought evil, seeing that there arose to
him no offspring of princely sons in his halls, save that he begat one
son to an untimely death. Neither may I tend him as he groweth old,
since very far from my country I am dwelling in Troy-land, to vex thee
and thy children. And of thee, old sire, we have heard how of old time
thou wert happy, even how of all that Lesbos, seat of Makar, boundeth
to the north thereof and Phrygia farther up and the vast Hellespont—of
all these folk, men say, thou wert the richest in wealth and in sons,
but after that the Powers of Heaven brought this bane on thee, ever are
battles and man-slayings around thy city. Keep courage, and lament not
unabatingly in thy heart. For nothing wilt thou avail by grieving for
thy son, neither shalt thou bring him back to life or ever some new
evil come upon thee.”

Then made answer unto him the old man, godlike Priam: “Bid me not to a
seat, O fosterling of Zeus, so long as Hector lieth uncared for at the
huts, but straightway give him back that I may behold him with mine
eyes; and accept thou the great ransom that we bring. So mayest thou
have pleasure thereof, and come unto thy native land, since thou hast
spared me from the first.”

Then fleet-footed Achilles looked sternly upon him and said: “No longer
chafe me, old sire; of myself am I minded to give Hector back to thee,
for there came to me a messenger from Zeus, even my mother who bare me,
daughter of the Ancient One of the Sea. And I know, O Priam, in my
mind, nor am unaware that some god it is that hath guided thee to the
swift ships of the Achaians. For no mortal man, even though in prime of
youth, would dare to come among the host, for neither could he escape
the watch, nor easily thrust back the bolt of our doors. Therefore now
stir my heart no more amid my troubles, lest I leave not even thee in
peace, old sire, within my hut, albeit thou art my suppliant, and lest
I transgress the commandment of Zeus.”

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and obeyed his word. And the son
of Peleus leapt like a lion through the door of the house, not alone,
for with him went two squires, the hero Automedon and Alkimos, they
whom above all his comrades Achilles honoured, save only Patroklos that
was dead. They then loosed from under the yoke the horses and mules,
and led in the old man’s crier-herald and set him on a chair, and from
the wain of goodly felloes they took the countless ransom set on
Hector’s head. But they left two robes and a well-spun doublet, that
Achilles might wrap the dead therein when he gave him to be carried
home. And he called forth handmaids and bade them wash and anoint him
when they had borne him apart, so that Priam should not look upon his
son, lest he should not refrain the wrath at his sorrowing heart when
he should look upon his son, and lest Achilles’ heart be vexed thereat
and he slay him and transgress the commandment of Zeus. So when the
handmaids had washed the body and anointed it with oil, and had thrown
over it a fair robe and a doublet, then Achilles himself lifted it and
laid it on a bier, and his comrades with him lifted it on to the
polished waggon. Then he groaned aloud and called on his dear comrade
by his name: “Patroklos, be not vexed with me if thou hear even in the
house of Hades that I have given back noble Hector unto his dear
father, for not unworthy is the ransom he hath given me, whereof I will
deal to thee again thy rightful share.”

Thus spake noble Achilles, and went back into the hut, and sate him
down on the cunningly-wrought couch whence he had arisen by the
opposite wall, and spake a word to Priam: “Thy son, old sire, is given
back as thou wouldest and lieth on a bier, and with the break of day
thou shalt see him thyself as thou carriest him. But now bethink we us
of supper. For even fair-haired Niobe bethought her of meat, she whose
twelve children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty
sons. The sons Apollo, in his anger against Niobe, slew with arrows
from his silver bow, and the daughters archer Artemis, for that Niobe
matched herself against fair-cheeked Leto, saying that the goddess bare
but twain but herself many children: so they though they were but twain
destroyed the other all. Nine days they lay in their blood, nor was
there any to bury them, for Kronion turned the folk to stones. Yet on
the tenth day the gods of heaven buried them, and she then bethought
her of meat, when she was wearied out with weeping tears. And somewhere
now among the cliffs, on the lonely mountains, even on Sipylos, where
they say are the couching-places of nymphs that dance around Acheloos,
there she, albeit a stone, broodeth still over her troubles from the
gods. But come let us too, noble father, take thought of meat, and
afterward thou shalt mourn over thy dear son as thou carriest him to
Ilios; and many tears shall be his due.”

Thus spake fleet Achilles, and sprang up, and slew a pure white sheep,
and his comrades skinned and made it ready in seemly fashion, and
divided it cunningly and pierced it with spits, and roasted it
carefully and drew all off. And Automedon took bread and served it on a
table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt out the flesh. And they
stretched forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them.
But when they had put off the desire of meat and drink, then Priam son
of Dardanos marvelled at Achilles to see how great he was and how
goodly, for he was like a god to look upon. And Achilles marvelled at
Priam son of Dardanos, beholding his noble aspect and hearkening to his
words. But when they had gazed their fill upon one another, then first
spake the old man, godlike Priam, to Achilles: “Now presently give me
whereon to lie, fosterling of Zeus, that of sweet sleep also we may now
take our fill at rest: for never yet have mine eyes closed beneath
their lids since at thy hands my son lost his life, but I continually
mourn and brood over countless griefs, grovelling in the
courtyard-close amid the mire. Now at last have I tasted bread and
poured bright wine down my throat, but till now I had tasted naught.”

He said, and Achilles bade his comrades and handmaids to set a bedstead
beneath the portico, and to cast thereon fair shining rugs and spread
coverlets above and thereon to lay thick mantles to be a clothing over
all. And the maids went forth from the inner hail with torches in their
hands, and quickly spread two beds in haste. Then with bitter meaning
[in his reference to Agamemnon] said fleet-footed Achilles unto Priam:
“Lie thou without, dear sire, lest there come hither one of the
counsellors of the Achaians, such as ever take counsel with me by my
side, as custom is. If any of such should behold thee through the swift
black night, forthwith he might haply tell it to Agamemnon shepherd of
the host, and thus would there be delay in giving back the dead. But
come say this to me and tell it true, how many days’ space thou art
fain to make funeral for noble Hector, so that for so long I may myself
abide and may keep back the host.”

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: “If thou art
verily willing that I accomplish noble Hector’s funeral, by doing as
thou sayest, O Achilles, thou wilt do me grace. For thou knowest how we
are pent within the city, and wood from the mountain is far to fetch,
and the Trojans are much in fear. Nine days will we make moan for him
in our halls, and on the tenth we will hold funeral and the folk shall
feast, and on the eleventh we will make, a barrow over him, and on the
twelfth we will do battle if need be.”

Then again spake the fleet noble Achilles unto him, saying: “All this,
O ancient Priam, shall be as thou biddest; for I will hold back the
battle even so long a time as thou tellest me.”

Thus speaking he clasped the old man’s right hand at the wrist, lest he
should be anywise afraid at heart. So they in the forepart of the house
laid them down, Priam and the herald, with wise thoughts at their
hearts, but Achilles slept in a recess of the firm-wrought hut, and
beside him lay fair-cheeked Briseis.

Now all other gods and warriors lords of chariots slumbered all night,
by soft sleep overcome. But not on the Helper Hermes did sleep take
hold as he sought within his heart how he should guide forth king Priam
from the ships unespied of the trusty sentinels. And he stood above his
head and spake a word to him: “Old sire, no thought then hast thou of
any evil, seeing thou yet sleepest among men that are thine enemies,
for that Achilles spared thee. Truly now hast thou won back thy dear
son, and at great price. But for thy life will thy sons thou hast left
behind be offering threefold ransom, if but Agamemnon Atreus’ son be
aware of thee, and aware be all the Achaians.”

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and roused the herald. And
Hermes yoked the horses and mules for them, and himself drave them
lightly through the camp, and none was aware of them.

But when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, [even eddying
Xanthos, begotten of immortal Zeus,] then Hermes departed up to high
Olympus, and Morning of the saffron robe spread over all the earth. And
they with wail and moan drave the horses to the city, and the mules
drew the dead. Nor marked them any man or fair-girdled woman until
Kassandra, peer of golden Aphrodite, having gone up upon Pergamos, was
aware of her dear father as he stood in the car, and the herald that
was crier to the town. Then beheld she him that lay upon the bier
behind the mules, and thereat she wailed and cried aloud throughout all
the town: “O men and women of Troy, come ye hither and look upon
Hector, if ever while he was alive ye rejoiced when he came back from
battle, since great joy was he to the city and all the folk.”

Thus spake she, nor was man or woman left within the city, for upon all
came unendurable grief. And near the gates they met Priam bringing home
the dead. First bewailed him his dear wife and lady mother, as they
cast them on the fair-wheeled wain and touched his head; and around
them stood the throng and wept. So all day long unto the setting of the
sun they had lamented Hector in tears without the gate, had not the old
man spoken from the car among the folk: “Give me place for the mules to
pass through; hereafter ye shall have your fill of wailing, when I have
brought him unto his home.”

Thus spake he, and they parted asunder and gave place to the wain. And
the others when they had brought him to the famous house, laid him on a
fretted bed, and set beside him minstrel leaders of the dirge, who
wailed a mournful lay, while the women made moan with them. And among
the women white-armed Andromache led the lamentation, while in her
hands she held the head of Hector slayer of men: “Husband, thou art
gone young from life, and leavest me a widow in thy halls. And the
child is yet but a little one, child of ill-fated parents, thee and me;
nor methinks shall he grow up to manhood, for ere then shall this city
be utterly destroyed. For thou art verily perished who didst watch over
it, who guardedst it and keptest safe its noble wives and infant little
ones. These soon shall be voyaging in the hollow ships, yea and I too
with them, and thou, my child, shalt either go with me unto a place
where thou shalt toil at unseemly tasks, labouring before the face of
some harsh lord, or else some Achaian will take thee by the arm and
hurl thee from the battlement, a grievous death, for that he is wroth
because Hector slew his brother or father or son, since full many of
the Achaians in Hector’s hands have bitten the firm earth. For no light
hand had thy father in the grievous fray. Therefore the folk lament him
throughout the city, and woe unspeakable and mourning hast thou left to
thy parents, Hector, but with me chiefliest shall grievous pain abide.
For neither didst thou stretch thy hands to me from a bed in thy death,
neither didst speak to me some memorable word that I might have thought
on evermore as my tears fall night and day.”

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan. And among them
Hekabe again led the loud lament: “Hector, of all my children far
dearest to my heart, verily while thou wert alive dear wert thou to the
gods, and even in thy doom of death have they had care for thee. For
other sons of mine whom he took captive would fleet Achilles sell
beyond the unvintaged sea unto Samos and Imbros and smoking Lemnos, but
when with keen-edged bronze he had bereft thee of thy life he was fain
to drag thee oft around the tomb of his comrade, even Patroklos whom
thou slewest, yet might he not raise him up thereby. But now all dewy
and fresh thou liest in our halls, like one on whom Apollo, lord of the
silver bow, hath descended and slain him with his gentle darts.”

Thus spake she wailing, and stirred unending moan. Then thirdly Helen
led their sore lament: “Hector, of all my brethren of Troy far dearest
to my heart! Truly my lord is godlike Alexandros who brought me to
Troy-land—would I had died ere then. For this is now the twentieth year
since I went thence and am gone from my own native land, but never yet
heard I evil or despiteful word from thee; nay, if any other haply
upbraided me in the palace-halls, whether brother or sister of thine or
brother’s fair-robed wife, or thy mother—but thy father is ever kind to
me as he were my own—then wouldst thou soothe such with words and
refrain them, by the gentleness of thy spirit and by thy gentle words.
Therefore bewail I thee with pain at heart, and my hapless self with
thee, for no more is any left in wide Troy-land to be my friend and
kind to me, but all men shudder at me.”

Thus spake she wailing, and therewith the great multitude of the people
groaned. But the old man Priam spake a word among the folk: “Bring
wood, men of Troy, unto the city, and be not anywise afraid at heart of
a crafty ambush of the Achaians; for this message Achilles gave me when
he sent me from the black ships, that they should do us no hurt until
the twelfth morn arise.”

Thus spake he, and they yoked oxen and mules to wains, and quickly then
they flocked before the city. So nine days they gathered great store of
wood. But when the tenth morn rose with light for men, then bare they
forth brave Hector, weeping tears, and on a lofty pyre they laid the
dead man, and thereon cast fire.

But when the daughter of Dawn, rosy-fingered Morning, shone forth, then
gathered the folk around glorious Hector’s pyre. First quenched they
with bright wine all the burning, so far as the fire’s strength went,
and then his brethren and comrades gathered his white bones lamenting,
and big tears flowed down their cheeks. And the bones they took and
laid in a golden urn, shrouding them in soft purple robes, and
straightway laid the urn in a hollow grave and piled thereon great
close-set stones, and heaped with speed a barrow, while watchers were
set everywhere around, lest the well-greaved Achaians should make onset
before the time. And when they had heaped the barrow they went back,
and gathered them together and feasted right well in noble feast at the
palace of Priam, Zeus-fostered king.

Thus held they funeral for Hector tamer of horses.


THE ODYSSEY

BOOK I


THE GODS IN COUNCIL—MINERVA’S VISIT TO ITHACA—THE CHALLENGE FROM
TELEMACHUS TO THE SUITORS.


Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide
after he had sacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit,
and many were the nations with whose manners and customs he was
acquainted; moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save his
own life and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he could
not save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in
eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god prevented them
from ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things, oh
daughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.

So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely
home except Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to his
wife and country, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got him
into a large cave and wanted to marry him. But as years went by, there
came a time when the gods settled that he should go back to Ithaca;
even then, however, when he was among his own people, his troubles were
not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun to pity him
except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would not
let him get home.

Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world’s end,
and lie in two halves, the one looking West and the other East.1 He had
gone there to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying
himself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house of
Olympian Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. At that moment
he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by Agamemnon’s son
Orestes; so he said to the other gods:

“See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing
but their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love to
Agamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knew
it would be the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to do
either of these things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure to take his
revenge when he grew up and wanted to return home. Mercury told him
this in all good will but he would not listen, and now he has paid for
everything in full.”

Then Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it served
Aegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as he did; but
Aegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my heart
bleeds, when I think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island,
far away, poor man, from all his friends. It is an island covered with
forest, in the very middle of the sea, and a goddess lives there,
daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks after the bottom of the
ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth
asunder. This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses,
and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his
home, so that he is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how he may
once more see the smoke of his own chimneys. You, sir, take no heed of
this, and yet when Ulysses was before Troy did he not propitiate you
with many a burnt sacrifice? Why then should you keep on being so angry
with him?”

And Jove said, “My child, what are you talking about? How can I forget
Ulysses than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor more
liberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? Bear
in mind, however, that Neptune is still furious with Ulysses for having
blinded an eye of Polyphemus king of the Cyclopes. Polyphemus is son to
Neptune by the nymph Thoosa, daughter to the sea-king Phorcys;
therefore though he will not kill Ulysses outright, he torments him by
preventing him from getting home. Still, let us lay our heads together
and see how we can help him to return; Neptune will then be pacified,
for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand out against us.”

And Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then, the
gods now mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first send
Mercury to the Ogygian island to tell Calypso that we have made up our
minds and that he is to return. In the meantime I will go to Ithaca, to
put heart into Ulysses’ son Telemachus; I will embolden him to call the
Achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his mother
Penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep and oxen; I
will also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to see if he can hear
anything about the return of his dear father—for this will make people
speak well of him.”

So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable,
with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the
redoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong,
wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her, and
down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus, whereon forthwith
she was in Ithaca, at the gateway of Ulysses’ house, disguised as a
visitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she held a bronze spear in
her hand. There she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of the
oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in front of
the house. Men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait upon
them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaning
down the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some
cutting up great quantities of meat.

Telemachus saw her long before any one else did. He was sitting moodily
among the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he would
send them flying out of the house, if he were to come to his own again
and be honoured as in days gone by. Thus brooding as he sat among them,
he caught sight of Minerva and went straight to the gate, for he was
vexed that a stranger should be kept waiting for admittance. He took
her right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear. “Welcome,”
said he, “to our house, and when you have partaken of food you shall
tell us what you have come for.”

He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him. When they were
within he took her spear and set it in the spear-stand against a strong
bearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy father,
and he conducted her to a richly decorated seat under which he threw a
cloth of damask. There was a footstool also for her feet,2 and he set
another seat near her for himself, away from the suitors, that she
might not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence, and
that he might ask her more freely about his father.

A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer and
poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she
drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread,
and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, the
carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold
by their side, and a manservant brought them wine and poured it out for
them.


Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and
seats.3 Forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maids
went round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with
wine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things that
were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink they
wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments of a
banquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom they compelled
perforce to sing to them. As soon as he touched his lyre and began to
sing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers that
no man might hear.

“I hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended with what I am
going to say. Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, and
all this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some
wilderness or grinding to powder in the surf. If these men were to see
my father come back to Ithaca they would pray for longer legs rather
than a longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he, alas, has
fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes say that he is
coming, we no longer heed them; we shall never see him again. And now,
sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are and where you come from.
Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how
your crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what nation they declared
themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land. Tell me also truly,
for I want to know, are you a stranger to this house, or have you been
here in my father’s time? In the old days we had many visitors for my
father went about much himself.”

And Minerva answered, “I will tell you truly and particularly all about
it. I am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians. I
have come here with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreign
tongue being bound for Temesa4 with a cargo of iron, and I shall bring
back copper. As for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open country
away from the town, in the harbour Rheithron5 under the wooded mountain
Neritum.6 Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tell
you, if you will go and ask him. They say, however, that he never comes
to town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly, with
an old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when he
comes in tired from pottering about his vineyard. They told me your
father was at home again, and that was why I came, but it seems the
gods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not on the
mainland. It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean,
or a prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will. I
am no prophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak as it is
borne in upon me from heaven, and assure you that he will not be away
much longer; for he is a man of such resource that even though he were
in chains of iron he would find some means of getting home again. But
tell me, and tell me true, can Ulysses really have such a fine looking
fellow for a son? You are indeed wonderfully like him about the head
and eyes, for we were close friends before he set sail for Troy where
the flower of all the Argives went also. Since that time we have never
either of us seen the other.”

“My mother,” answered Telemachus, “tells me I am son to Ulysses, but it
is a wise child that knows his own father. Would that I were son to one
who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there is
no more ill-starred man under heaven than he who they tell me is my
father.”

And Minerva said, “There is no fear of your race dying out yet, while
Penelope has such a fine son as you are. But tell me, and tell me true,
what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people?
What is it all about? Have you some banquet, or is there a wedding in
the family—for no one seems to be bringing any provisions of his own?
And the guests—how atrociously they are behaving; what riot they make
over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable person
who comes near them.”

“Sir,” said Telemachus, “as regards your question, so long as my father
was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their
displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more
closely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. I could have borne it
better even though he were dead, if he had fallen with his men before
Troy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fighting
were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his
ashes, and I should myself have been heir to his renown; but now the
storm-winds have spirited him away we know not whither; he is gone
without leaving so much as a trace behind him, and I inherit nothing
but dismay. Nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss of
my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind; for the
chiefs from all our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland island
of Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are
eating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to my
mother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry,7 nor
yet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, and
before long will do so also with myself.”

“Is that so?” exclaimed Minerva, “then you do indeed want Ulysses home
again. Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple of lances, and if he
is the man he was when I first knew him in our house, drinking and
making merry, he would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors,
were he to stand once more upon his own threshold. He was then coming
from Ephyra, where he had been to beg poison for his arrows from Ilus,
son of Mermerus. Ilus feared the ever-living gods and would not give
him any, but my father let him have some, for he was very fond of him.
If Ulysses is the man he then was these suitors will have a short
shrift and a sorry wedding.

“But there! It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return,
and take his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge you
to set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once. Take my
advice, call the Achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay your
case before them, and call heaven to bear you witness. Bid the suitors
take themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother’s mind
is set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will find
her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that so dear
a daughter may expect. As for yourself, let me prevail upon you to take
the best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men, and go in quest
of your father who has so long been missing. Some one may tell you
something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some
heaven-sent message may direct you. First go to Pylos and ask Nestor;
thence go on to Sparta and visit Menelaus, for he got home last of all
the Achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive and on his way
home, you can put up with the waste these suitors will make for yet
another twelve months. If on the other hand you hear of his death, come
home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again. Then, having
done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means or
foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. You are too old to
plead infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing
Orestes’ praises for having killed his father’s murderer Aegisthus? You
are a fine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make
yourself a name in story. Now, however, I must go back to my ship and
to my crew, who will be impatient if I keep them waiting longer; think
the matter over for yourself, and remember what I have said to you.”

“Sir,” answered Telemachus, “it has been very kind of you to talk to me
in this way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all you tell
me; I know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a
little longer till you have taken a bath and refreshed yourself. I will
then give you a present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; I will
give you one of great beauty and value—a keepsake such as only dear
friends give to one another.”

Minerva answered, “Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way at
once. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till I
come again, and I will take it home with me. You shall give me a very
good one, and I will give you one of no less value in return.”

With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she had
given Telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about
his father. He felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the
stranger had been a god, so he went straight to where the suitors were
sitting.

Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he
told the sad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva had
laid upon the Achaeans. Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his song
from her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase, not
alone, but attended by two of her handmaids. When she reached the
suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the roof
of the cloisters8 with a staid maiden on either side of her. She held a
veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.

“Phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods and heroes,
such as poets love to celebrate. Sing the suitors some one of these,
and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for
it breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds me of my lost husband whom I
mourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all Hellas
and middle Argos.”9

“Mother,” answered Telemachus, “let the bard sing what he has a mind
to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they, who
makes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own
good pleasure. This fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fated
return of the Danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs most
warmly. Make up your mind to it and bear it; Ulysses is not the only
man who never came back from Troy, but many another went down as well
as he. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily
duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for
speech is man’s matter, and mine above all others 10—for it is I who am
master here.”

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in
her heart. Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she
mourned her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes.
But the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters11, and
prayed each one that he might be her bed fellow.

Then Telemachus spoke, “Shameless,” he cried, “and insolent suitors,
let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for it
is a rare thing to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius has;
but in the morning meet me in full assembly that I may give you formal
notice to depart, and feast at one another’s houses, turn and turn
about, at your own cost. If on the other hand you choose to persist in
spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you
in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be no man
to avenge you.”

The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the
boldness of his speech. Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, “The
gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may
Jove never grant you to be chief in Ithaca as your father was before
you.”

Telemachus answered, “Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing,
I will be chief too if I can. Is this the worst fate you can think of
for me? It is no bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches and
honour. Still, now that Ulysses is dead there are many great men in
Ithaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among them;
nevertheless I will be chief in my own house, and will rule those whom
Ulysses has won for me.”

Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, “It rests with heaven to
decide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own
house and over your own possessions; no one while there is a man in
Ithaca shall do you violence nor rob you. And now, my good fellow, I
want to know about this stranger. What country does he come from? Of
what family is he, and where is his estate? Has he brought you news
about the return of your father, or was he on business of his own? He
seemed a well to do man, but he hurried off so suddenly that he was
gone in a moment before we could get to know him.”

“My father is dead and gone,” answered Telemachus, “and even if some
rumour reaches me I put no more faith in it now. My mother does indeed
sometimes send for a soothsayer and question him, but I give his
prophecyings no heed. As for the stranger, he was Mentes, son of
Anchialus, chief of the Taphians, an old friend of my father’s.” But in
his heart he knew that it had been the goddess.

The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the
evening; but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to
bed each in his own abode.12 Telemachus’s room was high up in a tower13
that looked on to the outer court; hither, then, he hied, brooding and
full of thought. A good old woman, Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the son
of Pisenor, went before him with a couple of blazing torches. Laertes
had bought her with his own money when she was quite young; he gave the
worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in his
household as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take her to
his bed for he feared his wife’s resentment.14 She it was who now
lighted Telemachus to his room, and she loved him better than any of
the other women in the house did, for she had nursed him when he was a
baby. He opened the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; as
he took off his shirt15 he gave it to the good old woman, who folded it
tidily up, and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, after which
she went out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolt
home by means of the strap.16 But Telemachus as he lay covered with a
woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage
and of the counsel that Minerva had given him.




BOOK II


ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA—SPEECHES OF TELEMACHUS AND OF THE
SUITORS—TELEMACHUS MAKES HIS PREPARATIONS AND STARTS FOR PYLOS WITH
MINERVA DISGUISED AS MENTOR.


Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared Telemachus
rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like an
immortal god. He at once sent the criers round to call the people in
assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then,
when they were got together, he went to the place of assembly spear in
hand—not alone, for his two hounds went with him. Minerva endowed him
with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as
he went by, and when he took his place in his father’s seat even the
oldest councillors made way for him.

Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, was
the first to speak. His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius,
land of noble steeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when they
were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him.17
He had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father’s
land, while the third, Eurynomus, was one of the suitors; nevertheless
their father could not get over the loss of Antiphus, and was still
weeping for him when he began his speech.

“Men of Ithaca,” he said, “hear my words. From the day Ulysses left us
there has been no meeting of our councillors until now; who then can it
be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? Has
he got wind of some host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, or
would he speak upon some other matter of public moment? I am sure he is
an excellent person, and I hope Jove will grant him his heart’s
desire.”

Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he
was bursting with what he had to say. He stood in the middle of the
assembly and the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then,
turning to Aegyptius, “Sir,” said he, “it is I, as you will shortly
learn, who have convened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved. I
have not got wind of any host approaching about which I would warn you,
nor is there any matter of public moment on which I would speak. My
grievance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes which
have fallen upon my house. The first of these is the loss of my
excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and was
like a father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, and
ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all the chief
men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.
They are afraid to go to her father Icarius, asking him to choose the
one he likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but
day by day they keep hanging about my father’s house, sacrificing our
oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much
as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand
such recklessness; we have now no Ulysses to ward off harm from our
doors, and I cannot hold my own against them. I shall never all my days
be as good a man as he was, still I would indeed defend myself if I had
power to do so, for I cannot stand such treatment any longer; my house
is being disgraced and ruined. Have respect, therefore, to your own
consciences and to public opinion. Fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest
the gods should be displeased and turn upon you. I pray you by Jove and
Themis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold
back, my friends, and leave me singlehanded18—unless it be that my
brave father Ulysses did some wrong to the Achaeans which you would now
avenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I am
to be eaten out of house and home at all, I had rather you did the
eating yourselves, for I could then take action against you to some
purpose, and serve you with notices from house to house till I got paid
in full, whereas now I have no remedy.”19

With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into
tears. Every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no
one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only Antinous, who spoke
thus:

“Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw
the blame upon us suitors? It is your mother’s fault not ours, for she
is a very artful woman. This three years past, and close on four, she
had been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us,
and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she says. And
then there was that other trick she played us. She set up a great
tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous piece of
fine needlework. ‘Sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead,
still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait—for I would not
have skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall
for the hero Laertes, to be in readiness against the time when death
shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk
if he is laid out without a pall.’

“This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her
working on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick
the stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three
years and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was now
in her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told
us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to
finish it whether she would or no. The suitors, therefore, make you
this answer, that both you and the Achaeans may understand—‘Send your
mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her father’s
choice’; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us
much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the
accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever.
We never yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro, Alcmena,
Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to your
mother any one of them. It was not fair of her to treat us in that way,
and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven has now
endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate; and I do not
see why she should change, for she gets all the honour and glory, and
it is you who pay for it, not she. Understand, then, that we will not
go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made her
choice and married some one or other of us.”

Telemachus answered, “Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore me
from my father’s house? My father is abroad and we do not know whether
he is alive or dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay Icarius the
large sum which I must give him if I insist on sending his daughter
back to him. Not only will he deal rigorously with me, but heaven will
also punish me; for my mother when she leaves the house will call on
the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not be a creditable thing
to do, and I will have nothing to say to it. If you choose to take
offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one another’s
houses at your own cost turn and turn about. If, on the other hand, you
elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove
shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house
there shall be no man to avenge you.”

As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they
flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly
flight. When they were right over the middle of the assembly they
wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaring
death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercely
and tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over the
town. The people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other what
all this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the best prophet and
reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,
saying:

“Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors,
for I see mischief brewing for them. Ulysses is not going to be away
much longer; indeed he is close at hand to deal out death and
destruction, not on them alone, but on many another of us who live in
Ithaca. Let us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this wickedness
before he comes. Let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will be
better for them, for I am not prophesying without due knowledge;
everything has happened to Ulysses as I foretold when the Argives set
out for Troy, and he with them. I said that after going through much
hardship and losing all his men he should come home again in the
twentieth year and that no one would know him; and now all this is
coming true.”

Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, “Go home, old man, and prophesy to
your own children, or it may be worse for them. I can read these omens
myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about in the
sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. Ulysses has
died in a far country, and it is a pity you are not dead along with
him, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the anger
of Telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. I suppose you think he
will give you something for your family, but I tell you—and it shall
surely be—when an old man like you, who should know better, talks a
young one over till he becomes troublesome, in the first place his
young friend will only fare so much the worse—he will take nothing by
it, for the suitors will prevent this—and in the next, we will lay a
heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all like paying, for
it will bear hardly upon you. As for Telemachus, I warn him in the
presence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who will
find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so dear
a daughter may expect. Till then we shall go on harassing him with our
suit; for we fear no man, and care neither for him, with all his fine
speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. You may preach as much
as you please, but we shall only hate you the more. We shall go back
and continue to eat up Telemachus’s estate without paying him, till
such time as his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day
after day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the other in
his suit for a prize of such rare perfection. Besides we cannot go
after the other women whom we should marry in due course, but for the
way in which she treats us.”

Then Telemachus said, “Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall say
no more, and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people of
Ithaca now know my story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty
men to take me hither and thither, and I will go to Sparta and to Pylos
in quest of my father who has so long been missing. Some one may tell
me something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some
heaven-sent message may direct me. If I can hear of him as alive and on
his way home I will put up with the waste you suitors will make for yet
another twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of his death, I will
return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a
barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.”

With these words he sat down, and Mentor20 who had been a friend of
Ulysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authority
over the servants, rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all honesty
addressed them thus:

“Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind and
well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; I
hope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for
there is not one of you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you as
though he were your father. I am not half so angry with the suitors,
for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts,
and wager their heads that Ulysses will not return, they can take the
high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others I am shocked at
the way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop such
scandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, for you are many
and they are few.”

Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, “Mentor, what folly is
all this, that you should set the people to stay us? It is a hard thing
for one man to fight with many about his victuals. Even though Ulysses
himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do
his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, would
have small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his own
head if he fought against such great odds. There is no sense in what
you have been saying. Now, therefore, do you people go about your
business, and let his father’s old friends, Mentor and Halitherses,
speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all—which I do not think
he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some one comes
and tells him something.”

On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own
abode, while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses.

Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in the
grey waves, and prayed to Minerva.

“Hear me,” he cried, “you god who visited me yesterday, and bade me
sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. I
would obey you, but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked
suitors, are hindering me that I cannot do so.”

As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness and
with the voice of Mentor. “Telemachus,” said she, “if you are made of
the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward
henceforward, for Ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half
done. If, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless,
but unless you have the blood of Ulysses and of Penelope in your veins
I see no likelihood of your succeeding. Sons are seldom as good men as
their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as you are
not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are not
entirely without some share of your father’s wise discernment, I look
with hope upon your undertaking. But mind you never make common cause
with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense nor
virtue, and give no thought to death and to the doom that will shortly
fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.
As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such
an old friend of mine that I will find you a ship, and will come with
you myself. Now, however, return home, and go about among the suitors;
begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see everything well
stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the staff of
life, in leathern bags, while I go round the town and beat up
volunteers at once. There are many ships in Ithaca both old and new; I
will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get
her ready and will put out to sea without delay.”

Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time in
doing as the goddess told him. He went moodily home, and found the
suitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinous
came up to him at once and laughed as he took his hand in his own,
saying, “Telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither
in word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. The
Achaeans will find you in everything—a ship and a picked crew to
boot—so that you can set sail for Pylos at once and get news of your
noble father.”

“Antinous,” answered Telemachus, “I cannot eat in peace, nor take
pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. Was it not enough that
you should waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a boy?
Now that I am older and know more about it, I am also stronger, and
whether here among this people, or by going to Pylos, I will do you all
the harm I can. I shall go, and my going will not be in vain—though,
thanks to you suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of my own, and must
be passenger not captain.”

As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous. Meanwhile the
others went on getting dinner ready about the buildings,21 jeering at
him tauntingly as they did so.

“Telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death of us; I
suppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or again
from Sparta, where he seems bent on going. Or will he go to Ephyra as
well, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?”

Another said, “Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will be
like his father and perish far from his friends. In this case we should
have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us:
as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her have
that.”

This was how they talked. But Telemachus went down into the lofty and
spacious store-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze lay
heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were
kept in open chests. Here, too, there was a store of fragrant olive
oil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a god
to drink, were ranged against the wall in case Ulysses should come home
again after all. The room was closed with well-made doors opening in
the middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper Euryclea, daughter
of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge of everything both night and
day. Telemachus called her to the store-room and said:

“Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you are
keeping for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, he should
escape death, and find his way home again after all. Let me have twelve
jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn
leathern bags with barley meal—about twenty measures in all. Get these
things put together at once, and say nothing about it. I will take
everything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs for
the night. I am going to Sparta and to Pylos to see if I can hear
anything about the return of my dear father.”

When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him,
saying, “My dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into
your head? Where in the world do you want to go to—you, who are the one
hope of the house? Your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign
country nobody knows where, and as soon as your back is turned these
wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out of the way, and
will share all your possessions among themselves; stay where you are
among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your life
out on the barren ocean.”

“Fear not, nurse,” answered Telemachus, “my scheme is not without
heaven’s sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this
to my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless she
hears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to spoil
her beauty by crying.”

The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she had
completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and
getting the barley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back to
the suitors.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. She took his shape, and
went round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at
the ship by sundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and asked
him to let her have a ship—which he was very ready to do. When the sun
had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into the
water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, and
stationed her at the end of the harbour. Presently the crew came up,
and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.

Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitors
into a deep slumber. She caused their drink to fuddle them, and made
them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting over
their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyes
heavy and full of drowsiness. Then she took the form and voice of
Mentor, and called Telemachus to come outside.

“Telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at their oars,
waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off.”

On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps. When
they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and
Telemachus said, “Now my men, help me to get the stores on board; they
are all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not know
anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one.”

With these words he led the way and the others followed after. When
they had brought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board,
Minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the
vessel, while Telemachus sat beside her. Then the men loosed the
hawsers and took their places on the benches. Minerva sent them a fair
wind from the West,22 that whistled over the deep blue waves23 whereon
Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and
they did as he told them. They set the mast in its socket in the cross
plank, raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they
hoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. As the
sail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue
water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. Then
they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing bowls to the
brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from
everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.

Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night
from dark till dawn.




BOOK III


TELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR AT PYLOS.


but as the sun was rising from the fair sea24 into the firmament of
heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos the
city of Neleus. Now the people of Pylos were gathered on the sea shore
to offer sacrifice of black bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake.
There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were
nine bulls to each guild. As they were eating the inward meats25 and
burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of Neptune,
Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship
to anchor, and went ashore.

Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said,
“Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have
taken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and
how he came by his end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may see
what he has got to tell us. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will
tell no lies, for he is an excellent person.”

“But how, Mentor,” replied Telemachus, “dare I go up to Nestor, and how
am I to address him? I have never yet been used to holding long
conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who
is so much older than myself.”

“Some things, Telemachus,” answered Minerva, “will be suggested to you
by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for I am
assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth
until now.”

She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till
they reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were
assembled. There they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his
company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of
meat on to the spits26 while other pieces were cooking. When they saw
the strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade
them take their places. Nestor’s son Pisistratus at once offered his
hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were
lying on the sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes. Then he
gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them
into a golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting her at the
same time.

“Offer a prayer, sir,” said he, “to King Neptune, for it is his feast
that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink
offering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubt
not that he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without
God in the world. Still he is younger than you are, and is much of an
age with myself, so I will give you the precedence.”

As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right and
proper of him to have given it to herself first;27 she accordingly
began praying heartily to Neptune. “O thou,” she cried, “that
encirclest the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants
that call upon thee. More especially we pray thee send down thy grace
on Nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the Pylian
people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering
you. Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect of
the matter that has brought us in our ship to Pylos.”

When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to
Telemachus and he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats were
roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man
his portion and they all made an excellent dinner. As soon as they had
had enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak.

“Now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, it will be
best to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you, and
from what port have you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail the
seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man’s hand
against you?”

Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask
about his father and get himself a good name.

“Nestor,” said he, “son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you ask
whence we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca under
Neritum,28 and the matter about which I would speak is of private not
public import. I seek news of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said to
have sacked the town of Troy in company with yourself. We know what
fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at Troy, but as
regards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that he is
dead at all, for no one can certify us in what place he perished, nor
say whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amid
the waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, if
haply you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether you
saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for
he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for
me, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave
father Ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when
you Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in
my favour and tell me truly all.”

“My friend,” answered Nestor, “you recall a time of much sorrow to my
mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, while
privateering under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city of
king Priam. Our best men all of them fell there—Ajax, Achilles,
Patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, a
man singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. But we suffered much
more than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story?
Though you were to stay here and question me for five years, or even
six, I could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and you would
turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine long years did we
try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us;
during all this time there was no one who could compare with your
father in subtlety—if indeed you are his son—I can hardly believe my
eyes—and you talk just like him too—no one would say that people of
such different ages could speak so much alike. He and I never had any
kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, but
in singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how all might
be ordered for the best.

“When, however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail
in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the
Argives on their homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wise
or understanding, and hence many came to a bad end through the
displeasure of Jove’s daughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrel
between the two sons of Atreus.

“The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, for
it was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they
explained why they had called the people together, it seemed that
Menelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased
Agamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we had offered
hecatombs to appease the anger of Minerva. Fool that he was, he might
have known that he would not prevail with her, for when the gods have
made up their minds they do not change them lightly. So the two stood
bandying hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a
cry that rent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.

“That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatching
mischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships into
the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest,
about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We—the other
half—embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had
smoothed the sea. When we reached Tenedos we offered sacrifices to the
gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however, did not yet
mean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel in the course of
which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away
under Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I, and all the
ships that were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischief was
brewing. The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with
him. Later on Menelaus joined us at Lesbos, and found us making up our
minds about our course—for we did not know whether to go outside Chios
by the island of Psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside Chios, over
against the stormy headland of Mimas. So we asked heaven for a sign,
and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out of
danger if we headed our ships across the open sea to Euboea. This we
therefore did, and a fair wind sprang up which gave us a quick passage
during the night to Geraestus,29 where we offered many sacrifices to
Neptune for having helped us so far on our way. Four days later Diomed
and his men stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos,
and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven first made it
fair for me.

“Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anything
about the others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were lost
but, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports that
have reached me since I have been here in my own house. They say the
Myrmidons returned home safely under Achilles’ son Neoptolemus; so also
did the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost no
men at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field got
safe home with him to Crete. No matter how far out of the world you
live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he came to at
the hands of Aegisthus—and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus presently
pay. See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him to
do as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of his noble
father. You too, then—for you are a tall smart-looking fellow—show your
mettle and make yourself a name in story.”

“Nestor son of Neleus,” answered Telemachus, “honour to the Achaean
name, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through all
time for he has avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grant
me to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are
ill treating me and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no such
happiness in store for me and for my father, so we must bear it as best
we may.”

“My friend,” said Nestor, “now that you remind me, I remember to have
heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards
you and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely,
or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knows
but what Ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in
full, either single-handed or with a force of Achaeans behind him? If
Minerva were to take as great a liking to you as she did to Ulysses
when we were fighting before Troy (for I never yet saw the gods so
openly fond of any one as Minerva then was of your father), if she
would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would
soon some of them forget their wooing.”

Telemachus answered, “I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far
too much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even though
the gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me.”

On this Minerva said, “Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heaven
has a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I
should not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided I
could be safe when I was once there. I would rather this, than get home
quickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was by the
treachery of Aegisthus and his wife. Still, death is certain, and when
a man’s hour is come, not even the gods can save him, no matter how
fond they are of him.”

“Mentor,” answered Telemachus, “do not let us talk about it any more.
There is no chance of my father’s ever coming back; the gods have long
since counselled his destruction. There is something else, however,
about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more than
any one else does. They say he has reigned for three generations so
that it is like talking to an immortal. Tell me, therefore, Nestor, and
tell me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that way? What was
Menelaus doing? And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far better a
man than himself? Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyaging
elsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killed
Agamemnon?”

“I will tell you truly,” answered Nestor, “and indeed you have yourself
divined how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back from Troy had
found Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been no
barrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would have
been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a woman
would have mourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness; but
we were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus, who was
taking his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon’s wife
Clytemnestra with incessant flattery.

“At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she
was of a good natural disposition;30 moreover there was a bard with
her, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy,
that he was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled
her destruction, Aegisthus carried this bard off to a desert island and
left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon—after which she
went willingly enough to the house of Aegisthus. Then he offered many
burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples with
tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his
expectations.

“Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good terms
with one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens,
Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of
Menelaus’ ship (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel in
rough weather) so that he died then and there with the helm in his
hand, and Menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to wait
in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites.
Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had sailed on as far
as the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and made it blow
hard till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet and
took the one half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round about
the waters of the river Iardanus. There is a high headland hereabouts
stretching out into the sea from a place called Gortyn, and all along
this part of the coast as far as Phaestus the sea runs high when there
is a south wind blowing, but after Phaestus the coast is more
protected, for a small headland can make a great shelter. Here this
part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews
just managed to save themselves. As for the other five ships, they were
taken by winds and seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered much gold and
substance among people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here at
home plotted his evil deed. For seven years after he had killed
Agamemnon he ruled in Mycene, and the people were obedient under him,
but in the eighth year Orestes came back from Athens to be his bane,
and killed the murderer of his father. Then he celebrated the funeral
rites of his mother and of false Aegisthus by a banquet to the people
of Argos, and on that very day Menelaus came home,31 with as much
treasure as his ships could carry.

“Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far
from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your
house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will
have been on a fool’s errand. Still, I should advise you by all means
to go and visit Menelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among such
distant peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when the
winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds
cannot fly the distance in a twelve-month, so vast and terrible are the
seas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, by sea, and take your
own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have a
chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you
to Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, and
he will tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person.”

As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said,
“Sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues
of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings
to Neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed
time. People should go away early and not keep late hours at a
religious festival.”

Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Men
servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled
the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink offering; then they threw the tongues of the
victims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink offerings. When
they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he was
minded, Minerva and Telemachus were for going on board their ship, but
Nestor caught them up at once and stayed them.

“Heaven and the immortal gods,” he exclaimed, “forbid that you should
leave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poor and
short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable to
find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me tell
you I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son
of my old friend Ulysses to camp down on the deck of a ship—not while I
live—nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as I
have done.”

Then Minerva answered, “Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much
better that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall
return with you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to give
orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. I am the only older
person among them; the rest are all young men of Telemachus’ own age,
who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return to the
ship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrow I must go to the Cauconians
where I have a large sum of money long owing to me. As for Telemachus,
now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a chariot, and let
one of your sons go with him. Be pleased to also provide him with your
best and fleetest horses.”

When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and
all marvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and took
Telemachus by the hand. “My friend,” said he, “I see that you are going
to be a great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while
you are still so young. This can have been none other of those who
dwell in heaven than Jove’s redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who
shewed such favour towards your brave father among the Argives. Holy
queen,” he continued, “vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my
good wife, and my children. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a
broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by
man under the yoke. I will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you
in sacrifice.”

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way to
his own house, followed by his sons and sons in law. When they had got
there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, he mixed
them a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the
housekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it. As he mixed the
wine, he prayed much and made drink offerings to Minerva, daughter of
Aegis-bearing Jove. Then, when they had made their drink offerings and
had drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home to bed
each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the room
that was over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the only
unmarried son now left him. As for himself, he slept in an inner room
of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.

Now when the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Nestor left
his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble
that stood in front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer of
gods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the house of
Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat sceptre in hand, as guardian of the
public weal. His sons as they left their rooms gathered round him,
Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymedes; the sixth son
was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them they made him sit with
them. Nestor then addressed them.

“My sons,” said he, “make haste to do as I shall bid you. I wish first
and foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifested
herself visibly to me during yesterday’s festivities. Go, then, one or
other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer,
and come on here with it at once. Another must go to Telemachus’ ship,
and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel.
Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild the
horns of the heifer. The rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the
maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats,
and logs of wood for a burnt offering. Tell them also to bring me some
clear spring water.”

On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer was
brought in from the plain, and Telemachus’s crew came from the ship;
the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he
worked his gold, and Minerva herself came to accept the sacrifice.
Nestor gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer
that the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty. Then Stratius and
Echephron brought her in by the horns; Aretus fetched water from the
house in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and in his other hand
he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by with a
sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket.
Then Nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley
meal, and he offered many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock from
the heifer’s head upon the fire.

When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal32 Thrasymedes
dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a stroke that cut
through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters and
daughters in law of Nestor, and his venerable wife Eurydice (she was
eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with delight. Then they lifted
the heifer’s head from off the ground, and Pisistratus cut her throat.
When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up. They
cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round in two
layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then
Nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while
the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands.
When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they
cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the spits and
toasted them over the fire.

Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor’s youngest daughter, washed
Telemachus. When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she
brought him a fair mantle and shirt,33 and he looked like a god as he
came from the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When the
outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to
dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept
pouring them out their wine in cups of gold. As soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink Nestor said, “Sons, put Telemachus’s horses to
the chariot that he may start at once.”

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the
fleet horses to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provision
of bread, wine, and sweet meats fit for the sons of princes. Then
Telemachus got into the chariot, while Pisistratus gathered up the
reins and took his seat beside him. He lashed the horses on and they
flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high
citadel of Pylos behind them. All that day did they travel, swaying the
yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all
the land. Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to
Ortilochus and grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and
Diocles entertained them hospitably. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and drove
out through the gateway under the echoing gatehouse.34 Pisistratus
lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently they
came to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of time
completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them.35

Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,




BOOK IV


THE VISIT TO KING MENELAUS, WHO TELLS HIS STORY—MEANWHILE THE SUITORS
IN ITHACA PLOT AGAINST TELEMACHUS.


they reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon, where they drove
straight to the abode of Menelaus36 [and found him in his own house,
feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son,
and also of his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that
valiant warrior Achilles. He had given his consent and promised her to
him while he was still at Troy, and now the gods were bringing the
marriage about; so he was sending her with chariots and horses to the
city of the Myrmidons over whom Achilles’ son was reigning. For his
only son he had found a bride from Sparta,37 the daughter of Alector.
This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven
vouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who was
fair as golden Venus herself.

So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making
merry in his house. There was a bard also to sing to them and play his
lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them
when the man struck up with his tune.38

Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate,
whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw
them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master. He went close
up to him and said, “Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two
men, who look like sons of Jove. What are we to do? Shall we take their
horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?”

Menelaus was very angry and said, “Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you never
used to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their horses
out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper;
you and I have staid often enough at other people’s houses before we
got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace
henceforward.”

So Eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him.
They took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to
the mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they
leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the
way into the house. Telemachus and Pisistratus were astonished when
they saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then,
when they had admired everything to their heart’s content, they went
into the bath room and washed themselves.

When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they
brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by
the side of Menelaus. A maid-servant brought them water in a beautiful
golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their
hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought
them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the
house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and
set cups of gold by their side.

Menelaus then greeted them saying, “Fall to, and welcome; when you have
done supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you
cannot have been lost. You must be descended from a line of
sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you
are.”

On this he handed them39 a piece of fat roast loin, which had been set
near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the good
things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and
drink, Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close
that no one might hear, “Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart, see
the gleam of bronze and gold—of amber,40 ivory, and silver. Everything
is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian Jove. I am
lost in admiration.”

Menelaus overheard him and said, “No one, my sons, can hold his own
with Jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but
among mortal men—well, there may be another who has as much wealth as I
have, or there may not; but at all events I have travelled much and
have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before I
could get home with my fleet. I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and the
Egyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and the
Erembians, and to Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are
born, and the sheep lamb down three times a year. Every one in that
country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good
milk, for the ewes yield all the year round. But while I was travelling
and getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretly
and shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that
I have no pleasure in being lord of all this wealth. Whoever your
parents may be they must have told you about all this, and of my heavy
loss in the ruin41 of a stately mansion fully and magnificently
furnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have so that I
had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain
of Troy, far from Argos. I often grieve, as I sit here in my house, for
one and all of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently I
leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it.
Yet grieve for these as I may, I do so for one man more than for them
all. I cannot even think of him without loathing both food and sleep,
so miserable does he make me, for no one of all the Achaeans worked so
hard or risked so much as he did. He took nothing by it, and has left a
legacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a long time, and we
know not whether he is alive or dead. His old father, his
long-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he left
behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.”

Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he
bethought him of his father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him
thus mentioned, so that he held his cloak before his face with both
hands. When Menelaus saw this he doubted whether to let him choose his
own time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all
about.

While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted
and perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste brought
her a seat, Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the
silver work-box which Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybus
lived in Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world;
he gave Menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten
talents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautiful
presents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work box that ran on
wheels, with a gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placed this by
her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violet
coloured wool was laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took her seat,
put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband.42

“Do we know, Menelaus,” said she, “the names of these strangers who
have come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?—but I cannot help
saying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman so like
somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think)
as this young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a baby
behind him, when you Achaeans went to Troy with battle in your hearts,
on account of my most shameless self.”

“My dear wife,” replied Menelaus, “I see the likeness just as you do.
His hands and feet are just like Ulysses; so is his hair, with the
shape of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when I was
talking about Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on my
account, tears fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle.”

Then Pisistratus said, “Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right in
thinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, and
is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose
conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. My father, Nestor,
sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether you could
give him any counsel or suggestion. A son has always trouble at home
when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this
is how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is
no one among his own people to stand by him.”

“Bless my heart,” replied Menelaus, “then I am receiving a visit from
the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.
I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when
heaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas. I should have
founded a city for him in Argos, and built him a house. I should have
made him leave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and
should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities that
are subject to me. We should thus have seen one another continually,
and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an
intercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great good
fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at
all.”

Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept,
Telemachus wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his
eyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whom
the son of bright Dawn had killed. Thereon he said to Menelaus,

“Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me
you were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then, it be
possible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while I am
getting my supper. Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon
I care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone. This is all
we can do for the poor things. We can only shave our heads for them and
wring the tears from our cheeks. I had a brother who died at Troy; he
was by no means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him—his
name was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon him myself, but they say
that he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.”

“Your discretion, my friend,” answered Menelaus, “is beyond your years.
It is plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a man is
son to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and
offspring—and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days,
giving him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him who
are both well disposed and valiant. We will put an end therefore to all
this weeping, and attend to our supper again. Let water be poured over
our hands. Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in the
morning.”

On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands
and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.

Then Jove’s daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She drugged
the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.
Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the rest
of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them drop
down dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in pieces before his very
eyes. This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given to
Helen by Polydamna wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, where there grow all
sorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing bowl and others
poisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole country is a skilled
physician, for they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen had put this
drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round,
she said:

“Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable
men (which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil,
and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while I
tell you a tale in season. I cannot indeed name every single one of the
exploits of Ulysses, but I can say what he did when he was before Troy,
and you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. He covered himself
with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the
enemy’s city looking like a menial or a beggar, and quite different
from what he did when he was among his own people. In this disguise he
entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him. I alone
recognised him and began to question him, but he was too cunning for
me. When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him
clothes, and after I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the
Trojans till he had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships,
he told me all that the Achaeans meant to do. He killed many Trojans
and got much information before he reached the Argive camp, for all
which things the Trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part I
was glad, for my heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and I was
unhappy about the wrong that Venus had done me in taking me over there,
away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is
indeed by no means deficient either in person or understanding.”

Then Menelaus said, “All that you have been saying, my dear wife, is
true. I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but I
have never seen such another man as Ulysses. What endurance too, and
what courage he displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the
bravest of the Argives were lying in wait to bring death and
destruction upon the Trojans.43 At that moment you came up to us; some
god who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and you
had Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round our hiding
place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and
mimicked all our wives—Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside
heard what a noise you made. Diomed and I could not make up our minds
whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but
Ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except
Anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses clapped his two
brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. It was this that
saved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you away
again.”

“How sad,” exclaimed Telemachus, “that all this was of no avail to save
him, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased to send us
all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”

On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was
in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread
coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to
wear. So the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds, to
which a man-servant presently conducted the strangers. Thus, then, did
Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the son
of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by his side.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Menelaus rose
and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded
his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an
immortal god. Then, taking a seat near Telemachus he said:

“And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage to
Lacedaemon? Are you on public, or private business? Tell me all about
it.”

“I have come, sir,” replied Telemachus, “to see if you can tell me
anything about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; my
fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who
keep killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of
paying their addresses to my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant at your
knees if haply you may tell me about my father’s melancholy end,
whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other
traveller; for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out
of any pity for myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you
saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service either by
word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear it
in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.”

Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. “So,” he exclaimed,
“these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hind might as well lay
her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in
the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his
lair will make short work with the pair of them—and so will Ulysses
with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is
still the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in
Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered him—if
he is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have a
short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions, however, I
will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without
concealment all that the old man of the sea told me.

“I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, for
my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are
very strict about having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far as a
ship can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is an
island called Pharos—it has a good harbour from which vessels can get
out into open sea when they have taken in water—and here the gods
becalmed me twenty days without so much as a breath of fair wind to
help me forward. We should have run clean out of provisions and my men
would have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon me and saved
me in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man of the
sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me.

“She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for the
men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope
of catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger.
‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘it seems to me that you like starving in this
way—at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day
after day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by
inches.’

“‘Let me tell you,’ said I, ‘whichever of the goddesses you may happen
to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must have
offended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the gods
know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me in
this way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my
home.’

“‘Stranger,’ replied she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you. There
is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose name is
Proteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he is
Neptune’s head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom
of the sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell you
about your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to
sail the sea so as to reach your home. He will also tell you, if you so
will, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while
you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’

“‘Can you show me,’ said I, ‘some stratagem by means of which I may
catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out? For a
god is not easily caught—not by a mortal man.’

“‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you. About
the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the
sea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that furs
the water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, and
goes to sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals—Halosydne’s chickens
as they call them—come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in
shoals all round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do they
bring with them. 44 Early to-morrow morning I will take you to this
place and will lay you in ambush. Pick out, therefore, the three best
men you have in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that the
old man will play you.

“‘First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he
has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleep
among them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you see that he
is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for
he will do his very utmost to get away from you. He will turn himself
into every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will become
also both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip him
tighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and comes back to
what he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your
hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that
is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over the
seas.’

“Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the
place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was
clouded with care as I went along. When I reached my ship we got supper
ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.

“When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I took the
three men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went
along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the
goddess fetched me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all
of them just skinned, for she meant playing a trick upon her father.
Then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we
should come up. When we were close to her, she made us lie down in the
pits one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us. Our
ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy
seals was most distressing45—who would go to bed with a sea monster if
he could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of
something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under
each man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of
the seals.46

“We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the
seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon the
old man of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals he
went over them and counted them. We were among the first he counted,
and he never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as
soon as he had done counting. Then we rushed upon him with a shout and
seized him; on which he began at once with his old tricks, and changed
himself first into a lion with a great mane; then all of a sudden he
became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he was running
water, and then again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him and
never lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became
distressed, and said, ‘Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that
hatched this plot with you for snaring me and seizing me against my
will? What do you want?’

“‘You know that yourself, old man,’ I answered, ‘you will gain nothing
by trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept so long in this
island, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losing all
heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the
immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail
the sea so as to reach my home?’

“Then,’ he said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly,
you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods before
embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your
friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the
heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal
gods that reign in heaven. When you have done this they will let you
finish your voyage.’

“I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long
and terrible voyage to Egypt;47 nevertheless, I answered, ‘I will do
all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me
true, whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we
set sail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them
came to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends
when the days of his fighting were done.’

“‘Son of Atreus,’ he answered, ‘why ask me? You had better not know
what I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard
my story. Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many
still remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans perished
during their return home. As for what happened on the field of
battle—you were there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still at sea,
alive, but hindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked, for Neptune drove
him on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him get safe
out of the water, and in spite of all Minerva’s hatred he would have
escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting. He said the
gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when
Neptune heard this large talk, he seized his trident in his two brawny
hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces. The base remained
where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting fell headlong into
the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water and was
drowned.

“‘Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but when
he was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caught
by a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against his
will, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, but
where Aegisthus was then living. By and by, however, it seemed as
though he was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the wind
into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon Agamemnon kissed
his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his own
country.

“‘Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch, and
to whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been looking
out for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him the
slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, he
went and told Aegisthus, who at once began to lay a plot for him. He
picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on
one side the cloister, while on the opposite side he prepared a
banquet. Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon, and
invited him to the feast, but he meant foul play. He got him there, all
unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when the
banquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in the shambles;
not one of Agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one of
Aegisthus’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’

“Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I sat
down upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear
to live nor look upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had had
my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea
said, ‘Son of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly;
it can do no manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you
can, for Aegisthus may be still alive, and even though Orestes has been
beforehand with you in killing him, you may yet come in for his
funeral.’

“On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘I know,
then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom
you spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is
he dead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.’

“‘The third man,’ he answered, ‘is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca. I can
see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph
Calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for
he has no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. As for your own
end, Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take you
to the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. There
fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any
where else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail,
nor snow, but Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that sings softly
from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. This will happen to you
because you have married Helen, and are Jove’s son-in-law.’

“As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the
ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I went
along. When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was
falling, and camped down upon the beach. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put
our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took
our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with our oars. I again
stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered
hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeased
heaven’s anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that his
name might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, for
the gods sent me a fair wind.

“And now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and I
will then speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present of a
chariot and three horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice that
so long as you live you may think of me whenever you make a
drink-offering to the immortal gods.”

“Son of Atreus,” replied Telemachus, “do not press me to stay longer; I
should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; I
find your conversation so delightful that I should never once wish
myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos
are already impatient, and you are detaining me from them. As for any
present you may be disposed to make me, I had rather that it should be
a piece of plate. I will take no horses back with me to Ithaca, but
will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat
ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet and
wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas
in Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country
is more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that.
48 None of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and
Ithaca least of all.”

Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus’s hand within his own. “What you
say,” said he, “shows that you come of good family. I both can, and
will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most
precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing bowl by
Vulcan’s own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with
gold. Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a
visit which I paid him when I returned thither on my homeward journey.
I will make you a present of it.”

Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house.
They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for
them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the
courts].49

Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a
mark on the levelled ground in front of Ulysses’ house, and were
behaving with all their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, who
were their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were
sitting together when Noemon son of Phronius came up and said to
Antinous,

“Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos?
He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have
twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet
broken in, and I want to bring one of them over here and break him.”

They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that
Telemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was only
away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the
swineherd; so Antinous said, “When did he go? Tell me truly, and what
young men did he take with him? Were they freemen or his own
bondsmen—for he might manage that too? Tell me also, did you let him
have the ship of your own free will because he asked you, or did he
take it without your leave?”

“I lent it him,” answered Noemon, “what else could I do when a man of
his position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him? I
could not possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they were the
best young men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain—or some
god who was exactly like him. I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor
here myself yesterday morning, and yet he was then setting out for
Pylos.”

Noemon then went back to his father’s house, but Antinous and
Eurymachus were very angry. They told the others to leave off playing,
and to come and sit down along with themselves. When they came,
Antinous son of Eupeithes spoke in anger. His heart was black with
rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said:

“Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; we
had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has
got away in spite of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be giving
us trouble presently; may Jove take him before he is full grown. Find
me a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in wait
for him in the straits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then rue the
day that he set out to try and get news of his father.”

Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all
of them went inside the buildings.

It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were
plotting; for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the
outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell
his mistress. As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said:
“Medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? Is it to tell the
maids to leave their master’s business and cook dinner for them? I wish
they may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere
else, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of
my son’s estate. Did not your fathers tell you when you were children,
how good Ulysses had been to them—never doing anything high-handed, nor
speaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes, and they
may take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never did
an unjust thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, and
that there is no such thing as gratitude left in this world.”

Then Medon said, “I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they are
plotting something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate their
design. They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming
home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his
father.”

Then Penelope’s heart sank within her, and for a long time she was
speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no
utterance. At last, however, she said, “Why did my son leave me? What
business had he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over
the ocean like sea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any one
behind him to keep up his name?”

“I do not know,” answered Medon, “whether some god set him on to it, or
whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if his
father was dead, or alive and on his way home.”

Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief.
There were plenty of seats in the house, but she had no heart for
sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor
of her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both old
and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in a
transport of sorrow she exclaimed,

“My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction than
any other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave and
lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and
whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos, and now my
darling son is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my having
heard one word about his leaving home. You hussies, there was not one
of you would so much as think of giving me a call out of my bed, though
you all of you very well knew when he was starting. If I had known he
meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, no matter
how much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him—one or
other. Now, however, go some of you and call old Dolius, who was given
me by my father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go at
once and tell everything to Laertes, who may be able to hit on some
plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those who
are trying to exterminate his own race and that of Ulysses.”

Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, “You may kill me, Madam, or let
me live on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you the
real truth. I knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted in
the way of bread and wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that I
would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless you
asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did not want you
to spoil your beauty by crying. And now, Madam, wash your face, change
your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to
Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save him even
though he be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he has
trouble enough already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate the
race of the son of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left to
come up after him, and inherit both the house and the fair fields that
lie far all round it.”

With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the
tears from her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and
went upstairs with her maids. She then put some bruised barley into a
basket and began praying to Minerva.

“Hear me,” she cried, “Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable. If
ever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or
heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son
from the villainy of the suitors.”

She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer;
meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister,
and one of them said:

“The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us.
Little does she dream that her son has now been doomed to die.”

This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to
happen. Then Antinous said, “Comrades, let there be no loud talking,
lest some of it get carried inside. Let us be up and do that in
silence, about which we are all of a mind.”

He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the
sea side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and
sails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted
thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft,
while their fine servants brought them their armour. Then they made the
ship fast a little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, and
waited till night should fall.

But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and
wondering whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by the
wicked suitors. Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen
hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank into
a slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in the
likeness of Penelope’s sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who had
married Eumelus and lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go to the
house of Ulysses, and to make Penelope leave off crying, so it came
into her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling the
door to, and hovered over her head saying,

“You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer
you to weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he will
yet come back to you.”

Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,
“Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but I
suppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then, to
leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me?
I, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good
quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas and
middle Argos; and now my darling son has gone off on board of a ship—a
foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to going
about among gatherings of men. I am even more anxious about him than
about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him, lest
something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he
has gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting against
him, and are bent on killing him before he can return home.”

Then the vision said, “Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. There
is one gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have stand
by his side, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and
who has sent me to bear you this message.”

“Then,” said Penelope, “if you are a god or have been sent here by
divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one—is he
still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?”

And the vision said, “I shall not tell you for certain whether he is
alive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation.”

Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated
into thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and
comforted, so vivid had been her dream.

Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea,
intent on murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet called
Asteris, of no great size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, and
there is a harbour on either side of it where a ship can lie. Here then
the Achaeans placed themselves in ambush.




BOOK V


CALYPSO—ULYSSES REACHES SCHERIA ON A RAFT.


And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus—harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them,
Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva began to
tell them of the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him away
there in the house of the nymph Calypso.

“Father Jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live in
everlasting bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind and
well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hope
they will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of
his subjects but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though he
were their father. There he is, lying in great pain in an island where
dwells the nymph Calypso, who will not let him go; and he cannot get
back to his own country, for he can find neither ships nor sailors to
take him over the sea. Furthermore, wicked people are now trying to
murder his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos and
Lacedaemon, where he has been to see if he can get news of his father.”

“What, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father, “did you
not send him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulysses
to get home and punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able to
protect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors
have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him.”

When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, “Mercury, you are
our messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poor
Ulysses is to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods nor
men, but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is to
reach fertile Scheria,50 the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of
kin to the gods, and will honour him as though he were one of
ourselves. They will send him in a ship to his own country, and will
give him more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought
back from Troy, if he had had all his prize money and had got home
without disaster. This is how we have settled that he shall return to
his country and his friends.”

Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as
he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with
which he could fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the wand
with which he seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he
pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swooped
down through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whose
waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole and
corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray. He
flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to the
island which was his journey’s end, he left the sea and went on by land
till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.

He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth, and
one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal
wood. As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden
shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. Round her cave there
was a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees,
wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests—owls, hawks, and
chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters. A vine
loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth of
the cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cut
pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigate
the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed. 51
Even a god could not help being charmed with such a lovely spot, so
Mercury stood still and looked at it; but when he had admired it
sufficiently he went inside the cave.

Calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, no matter
how far they live from one another—but Ulysses was not within; he was
on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears
in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso gave
Mercury a seat and said: “Why have you come to see me,
Mercury—honoured, and ever welcome—for you do not visit me often? Say
what you want; I will do it for you at once if I can, and if it can be
done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before you.”

As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed
him some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough,
and then said:

“We are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask me why I
have come here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do. Jove
sent me; it was no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all
this way over the sea where there are no cities full of people to offer
me sacrifices or choice hecatombs? Nevertheless I had to come, for none
of us other gods can cross Jove, nor transgress his orders. He says
that you have here the most ill-starred of all those who fought nine
years before the city of King Priam and sailed home in the tenth year
after having sacked it. On their way home they sinned against
Minerva,52 who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all his
brave companions perished, and he alone was carried hither by wind and
tide. Jove says that you are to let this man go at once, for it is
decreed that he shall not perish here, far from his own people, but
shall return to his house and country and see his friends again.”

Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “You gods,” she
exclaimed, “ought to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous
and hate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with
him in open matrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion,
you precious gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killed
him in Ortygia. So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and
yielded to him in a thrice-ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear of
it before so very long and killed Iasion with his thunderbolts. And now
you are angry with me too because I have a man here. I found the poor
creature sitting all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his
ship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were
drowned, while he himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island.
I got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him
immortal, so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot
cross Jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists
upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him
anywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men who can take him.
Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good faith, as
will be likely to bring him safely to his own country.”

“Then send him away,” said Mercury, “or Jove will be angry with you and
punish you”.

On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses,
for she had heard Jove’s message. She found him sitting upon the beach
with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness;
for he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep with
her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so. As
for the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea shore,
weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon the
sea. Calypso then went close up to him said:

“My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your
life out any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will;
so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with an
upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. I will put bread,
wine, and water on board to save you from starving. I will also give
you clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home, if the
gods in heaven so will it—for they know more about these things, and
can settle them better than I can.”

Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. “Now goddess,” he answered, “there
is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me
home when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft.
Not even a well found ship with a fair wind could venture on such a
distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall make me go on
board a raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean me no
mischief.”

Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “You know a
great deal,” said she, “but you are quite wrong here. May heaven above
and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—and
this is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take—that I mean
you no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what I
should do myself in your place. I am dealing with you quite
straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorry
for you.”

When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and
Ulysses followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on
and on till they came to Calypso’s cave, where Ulysses took the seat
that Mercury had just left. Calypso set meat and drink before him of
the food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar
for herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were
before them. When they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink,
Calypso spoke, saying:

“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own
land at once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how
much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own
country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and
let me make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see this
wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yet
I flatter myself that I am no whit less tall or well-looking than she
is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should compare in
beauty with an immortal.”

“Goddess,” replied Ulysses, “do not be angry with me about this. I am
quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so
beautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an
immortal. Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing
else. If some god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and
make the best of it. I have had infinite trouble both by land and sea
already, so let this go with the rest.”

Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into
the inner part of the cave and went to bed.

When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ulysses put on
his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamer
fabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle about
her waist and a veil to cover her head. She at once set herself to
think how she could speed Ulysses on his way. So she gave him a great
bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, and
had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. She also gave
him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the island
where the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, that reached the
sky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the
water.53 Then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew,
Calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished
doing. He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring
them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile Calypso came back
with some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the timbers
together with bolts and rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilled
shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he fixed a deck on top
of the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mast with a
yard arm, and a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all round with
wicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then he threw on
a quantity of wood. By and by Calypso brought him some linen to make
the sails, and he made these too, excellently, making them fast with
braces and sheets. Last of all, with the help of levers, he drew the
raft down into the water.

In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso
sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean
clothes. She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and another
larger one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions, and
found him in much good meat. Moreover, she made the wind fair and warm
for him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it, while he sat
and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder. He never closed
his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting Bootes,
and on the Bear—which men also call the wain, and which turns round and
round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping into the
stream of Oceanus—for Calypso had told him to keep this to his left.
Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the
dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeacian
coast appeared, rising like a shield on the horizon.

But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight
of Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could
see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged
his head and muttered to himself, saying, “Good heavens, so the gods
have been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away in
Ethiopia, and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where it
is decreed that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallen
him. Still, he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has done
with it.”

Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred
it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till
earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of
the heavens. Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon him all
at the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses’ heart
began to fail him. “Alas,” he said to himself in his dismay, “what ever
will become of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she said I should
have trouble by sea before I got back home. It is all coming true. How
black is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and what a sea the winds
are raising from every quarter at once. I am now safe to perish. Blest
and thrice blest were those Danaans who fell before Troy in the cause
of the sons of Atreus. Would that I had been killed on the day when the
Trojans were pressing me so sorely about the dead body of Achilles, for
then I should have had due burial and the Achaeans would have honoured
my name; but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end.”

As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft
reeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He let go
the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the
mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea. For a
long time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he could do to rise
to the surface again, for the clothes Calypso had given him weighed him
down; but at last he got his head above water and spat out the bitter
brine that was running down his face in streams. In spite of all this,
however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as he
could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to
escape drowning. The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumn
winds whirl thistledown round and round upon a road. It was as though
the South, North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore and
shuttlecock with it at once.

When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called
Leucothea, saw him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been
since raised to the rank of a marine goddess. Seeing in what great
distress Ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like
a sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft.

“My poor good man,” said she, “why is Neptune so furiously angry with
you? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster
he will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as I
bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to
the Phaeacian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take my
veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to
no harm so long as you wear it. As soon as you touch land take it off,
throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again.”
With these words she took off her veil and gave it him. Then she dived
down again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.

But Ulysses did not know what to think. “Alas,” he said to himself in
his dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring
me to ruin by advising me to quit my raft. At any rate I will not do so
at present, for the land where she said I should be quit of all
troubles seemed to be still a good way off. I know what I will do—I am
sure it will be best—no matter what happens I will stick to the raft as
long as her timbers hold together, but when the sea breaks her up I
will swim for it; I do not see how I can do any better than this.”

While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave that
seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft,
which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossed
about by a whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it
as if he were on horseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso had
given him, bound Ino’s veil under his arms, and plunged into the
sea—meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune watched him as he did so,
and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, “There now, swim
up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people. I
do not think you will be able to say that I have let you off too
lightly.” On this he lashed his horses and drove to Aegae where his
palace is.

But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the
winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a good
stiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till Ulysses
reached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe.

Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with
a heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but when
the third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without so
much as a breath of air stirring. As he rose on the swell he looked
eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. Then, as children rejoice
when their dear father begins to get better after having for a long
time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the gods
deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again saw land
and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might once more
set foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot, he
began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell
still broke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was enveloped
in spray; there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelter
of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.

Ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to
himself, “Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that I
had given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coast
is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the
sea, with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb out for
want of foot hold. I am afraid some great wave will lift me off my legs
and dash me against the rocks as I leave the water—which would give me
a sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim further in search of
some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry me out to sea
again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster of
the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and I know that
Neptune is very angry with me.”

While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such
force against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn to
pieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do. He caught hold of the
rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the wave
retired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave came on
again and carried him back with it far into the sea—tearing his hands
as the suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks it from its
bed, and the stones come up along with it—even so did the rocks tear
the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep down
under the water.

Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his
own destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him.
He swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating
against the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards the
shore to see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should take
the waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of a
river, and here he thought would be the best place, for there were no
rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that there was a
current, so he prayed inwardly and said:

“Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of the
sea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has lost
his way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my
distress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of your
riverhood. Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself your
suppliant.”

Then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm
before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here
at last Ulysses’ knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had
completely broken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth and
nostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neither
breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,
when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off the
scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt54 stream
of the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave that
bore it towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down among
the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.

“Alas,” he cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of
me, and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed through
the long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter cold
and damp may make an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be a keen
wind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand, I climb the
hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, I may
escape the cold and have a good night’s rest, but some savage beast may
take advantage of me and devour me.”

In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one
upon some high ground not far from the water. There he crept beneath
two shoots of olive that grew from a single stock—the one an ungrafted
sucker, while the other had been grafted. No wind, however squally,
could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun’s rays
pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow
into one another. Ulysses crept under these and began to make himself a
bed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves lying
about—enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hard
winter weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself down
and heaped the leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone in
the country, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in the
ashes to save himself from having to get a light elsewhere, even so did
Ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and Minerva shed a sweet sleep
upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories of
his sorrows.




BOOK VI


THE MEETING BETWEEN NAUSICAA AND ULYSSES.


So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went off
to the country and city of the Phaeacians—a people who used to live in
the fair town of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes
were stronger than they and plundered them, so their king Nausithous
moved them thence and settled them in Scheria, far from all other
people. He surrounded the city with a wall, built houses and temples,
and divided the lands among his people; but he was dead and gone to the
house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels were inspired of
heaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did Minerva hie in
furtherance of the return of Ulysses.

She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there
slept a girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to King
Alcinous. Two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty,
one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well made
folding doors. Minerva took the form of the famous sea captain Dymas’s
daughter, who was a bosom friend of Nausicaa and just her own age;
then, coming up to the girl’s bedside like a breath of wind, she
hovered over her head and said:

“Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazy
daughter? Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are
going to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well
dressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend
you. This is the way to get yourself a good name, and to make your
father and mother proud of you. Suppose, then, that we make tomorrow a
washing day, and start at daybreak. I will come and help you so that
you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best
young men among your own people are courting you, and you are not going
to remain a maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore, to have a
waggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and
girdles, and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you
than walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town.”

When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say is
the everlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, and
neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine
and in a great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are
illumined for ever and ever. This was the place to which the goddess
went when she had given instructions to the girl.

By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about her
dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her
father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room. Her
mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with her
maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as he was
going out to attend a meeting of the town council, which the Phaeacian
aldermen had convened. She stopped him and said:

“Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I want
to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are the
chief man here, so it is only right that you should have a clean shirt
when you attend meetings of the council. Moreover, you have five sons
at home, two of them married, while the other three are good looking
bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they go
to a dance, and I have been thinking about all this.”

She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to,
but her father knew and said, “You shall have the mules, my love, and
whatever else you have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men shall
get you a good strong waggon with a body to it that will hold all your
clothes.”

On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out,
harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the
clothes down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. Her
mother prepared her a basket of provisions with all sorts of good
things, and a goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon,
and her mother gave her also a golden cruse of oil, that she and her
women might anoint themselves. Then she took the whip and reins and
lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on
the road. They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa
and her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.

When they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns,
through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any
quantity of linen, no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the mules
and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the
water side. They took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in the
water, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to get
the dirt out. After they had washed them and got them quite clean, they
laid them out by the sea side, where the waves had raised a high beach
of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselves
with olive oil. Then they got their dinner by the side of the stream,
and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. When they had done
dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to
play at ball, while Nausicaa sang for them. As the huntress Diana goes
forth upon the mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars
or deer, and the wood nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, take
their sport along with her (then is Leto proud at seeing her daughter
stand a full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliest
amid a whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine her
handmaids.

When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the
clothes and putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider how
Ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him
to the city of the Phaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball at one
of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. On this they
all shouted, and the noise they made woke Ulysses, who sat up in his
bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.

“Alas,” said he to himself, “what kind of people have I come amongst?
Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? I
seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of
the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows
of green grass. At any rate I am among a race of men and women. Let me
try if I cannot manage to get a look at them.”

As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough
covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like some
lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and
defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest of
oxen, sheep, or deer, for he is famished, and will dare break even into
a well fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep—even such did
Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to them all naked as
he was, for he was in great want. On seeing one so unkempt and so
begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that
jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm, for
Minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. She
stood right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go up
to her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a
suppliant, or stay where he was and entreat her to give him some
clothes and show him the way to the town. In the end he deemed it best
to entreat her from a distance in case the girl should take offence at
his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so he addressed her in
honeyed and persuasive language.

“O queen,” he said, “I implore your aid—but tell me, are you a goddess
or are you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven, I
can only conjecture that you are Jove’s daughter Diana, for your face
and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a
mortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and
mother—thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and
delighted they must feel when they see so fair a scion as yourself
going out to a dance; most happy, however, of all will he be whose
wedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home.
I never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am
lost in admiration as I behold you. I can only compare you to a young
palm tree which I saw when I was at Delos growing near the altar of
Apollo—for I was there, too, with much people after me, when I was on
that journey which has been the source of all my troubles. Never yet
did such a young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and I
admired and wondered at it exactly as I now admire and wonder at
yourself. I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great distress;
yesterday made the twentieth day that I had been tossing about upon the
sea. The winds and waves have taken me all the way from the Ogygian
island,55 and now fate has flung me upon this coast that I may endure
still further suffering; for I do not think that I have yet come to the
end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for me.

“And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person I
have met, and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way to
your town, and let me have anything that you may have brought hither to
wrap your clothes in. May heaven grant you in all things your heart’s
desire—husband, house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing
better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in a
house. It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friends
glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one.”

To this Nausicaa answered, “Stranger, you appear to be a sensible,
well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives
prosperity to rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what
he has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. Now, however,
that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes
nor for anything else that a foreigner in distress may reasonably look
for. I will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name of
our people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am daughter to Alcinous, in
whom the whole power of the state is vested.”

Then she called her maids and said, “Stay where you are, you girls. Can
you not see a man without running away from him? Do you take him for a
robber or a murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here to do
us Phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on
a land’s end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do
with any other people. This is only some poor man who has lost his way,
and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distress
are under Jove’s protection, and will take what they can get and be
thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink,
and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from the
wind.”

On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another
back. They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told
them, and brought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him the
little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream.
But Ulysses said, “Young women, please to stand a little on one side
that I may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil,
for it is long enough since my skin has had a drop of oil upon it. I
cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. I am ashamed to
strip56 before a number of good looking young women.”

Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses
washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and
from his broad shoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself, and
had got the brine out of his hair, he anointed himself with oil, and
put on the clothes which the girl had given him; Minerva then made him
look taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thick
on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
she glorified him about the head and shoulders as a skilful workman who
has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva enriches a piece
of silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full of beauty. Then he
went and sat down a little way off upon the beach, looking quite young
and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said
to her maids:

“Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods who
live in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first saw
him I thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of the
gods who dwell in heaven. I should like my future husband to be just
such another as he is, if he would only stay here and not want to go
away. However, give him something to eat and drink.”

They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and
drank ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind.
Meanwhile, Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linen
folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she
took her seat, she called Ulysses:

“Stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to the town; I
will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I can
tell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaeacians.
But be sure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person.
As long as we are going past the fields and farm lands, follow briskly
behind the waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself.
Presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find a
high wall running all round it, and a good harbour on either side with
a narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by the
road side, for every one has a place where his own ship can lie. You
will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in the middle of it,
and paved with large stones bedded in the earth. Here people deal in
ship’s gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are
the places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation of
archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faring
folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which
they travel far over the sea.

“I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against
me later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low
fellow, if he met us, might say, ‘Who is this fine-looking stranger
that is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she find him? I suppose
she is going to marry him. Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she has
taken from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or some god
has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she is
going to live with him all the rest of her life. It would be a good
thing if she would take herself off and find a husband somewhere else,
for she will not look at one of the many excellent young Phaeacians who
are in love with her.’ This is the kind of disparaging remark that
would be made about me, and I could not complain, for I should myself
be scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with
men in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still
alive, and without having been married in the face of all the world.

“If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help
you home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars by
the road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow
all round it. Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, about
as far from the town as a man’s voice will carry. Sit down there and
wait for a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach my
father’s house. Then, when you think we must have done this, come into
the town and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous. You will
have no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you,
for no one else in the whole town has anything like such a fine house
as he has. When you have got past the gates and through the outer
court, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. You
will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by
firelight. It is a fine sight to see her as she leans back against one
of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind her. Close to her
seat stands that of my father, on which he sits and topes like an
immortal god. Never mind him, but go up to my mother, and lay your
hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. If you can gain her
over, you may hope to see your own country again, no matter how distant
it may be.”

So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
The mules drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were
following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with
judgement. As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove of
Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter
of Jove.

“Hear me,” he cried, “daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, hear
me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking
me. Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends
and be hospitably received by the Phaeacians.”

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show
herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who was
still furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home.




BOOK VII


RECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.


Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
town. When she reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway,
and her brothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mules
out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she
went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit
the fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira,
and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was king over
the Phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though he were a god.57
She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and
brought her supper for her into her own room.

Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a
thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud
Phaeacians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was.
Then, as he was just entering the town, she came towards him in the
likeness of a little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front
of him, and Ulysses said:

“My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?
I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your
town and country.”

Then Minerva said, “Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house you
want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go before
you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look at
any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide
strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. They are
a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Neptune in ships
that glide along like thought, or as a bird in the air.”

On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one
of the Phaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in the
midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards
him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired their
harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city,
which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when
they reached the king’s house Minerva said:

“This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you.
You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be
afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is
to carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First find the queen.
Her name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband
Alcinous. They both descend originally from Neptune, who was father to
Nausithous by Periboea, a woman of great beauty. Periboea was the
youngest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the
giants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own life to
boot.

“Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, the
great Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians. Nausithous had two
sons Rhexenor and Alcinous;58 Apollo killed the first of them while he
was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter
Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured
of all those that keep house along with their husbands.

“Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her
children, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon
her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for
she is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any
women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle
their disputes. If you can gain her good will, you may have every hope
of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and
country.”

Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to
Marathon59 and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered the
abode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous, and
he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold of
bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or
moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the
cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung on pillars of
silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver
and the hook of the door was of gold.

On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with
his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the
palace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow
old. Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end
to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the
house had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaeacians used to sit
and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there
were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands,
raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table.
There are60 fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always
grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom,
or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the
fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it
will turn oil. As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so
their women excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them
all manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.

Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of about
four acres with a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful
trees—pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are
luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor
fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so
soft that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows on
pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for
there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this,
the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on
have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again
are just changing colour. In the furthest part of the ground there are
beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year
round. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout
the whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the
outer court to the house itself, and the town’s people draw water from
it. Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the
house of king Alcinous.

So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he had
looked long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the
precincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among the
Phaeacians making their drink offerings to Mercury, which they always
did the last thing before going away for the night.61 He went straight
through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which
Minerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King Alcinous;
then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at that moment
the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became visible. Every
one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there, but Ulysses
began at once with his petition.

“Queen Arete,” he exclaimed, “daughter of great Rhexenor, in my
distress I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests
(whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they
leave their possessions to their children, and all the honours
conferred upon them by the state) to help me home to my own country as
soon as possible; for I have been long in trouble and away from my
friends.”

Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their
peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent
speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
addressed them thus:

“Alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that a stranger
should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is
waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and
take a seat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix
some wine and water that we may make a drink offering to Jove the lord
of thunder, who takes all well disposed suppliants under his
protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever
there may be in the house.”

When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from
the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been
sitting beside him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then
brought him water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a
silver basin for him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table
beside him; an upper servant brought him bread and offered him many
good things of what there was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank.
Then Alcinous said to one of the servants, “Pontonous, mix a cup of
wine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to Jove the
lord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants.”

Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, and
had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said:

“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You
have had your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall
invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial
banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his
escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his
own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no matter how
distant it may be. We must see that he comes to no harm while on his
homeward journey, but when he is once at home he will have to take the
luck he was born with for better or worse like other people. It is
possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who has
come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are
departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made
themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them
hecatombs. They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves,
and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other
of them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to the
gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are.”62

Then Ulysses said: “Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into
your head. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor
mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me,
you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless,
let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very
importunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man’s notice no matter how
dire is his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that I
shall eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and
dwell only on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do as
you propose, and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I
shall be content to die if I may first once more behold my property, my
bondsmen, and all the greatness of my house.”63

Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he
should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then when
they had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he
was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving
Ulysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the servants were
taking the things away after supper. Arete was the first to speak, for
she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Ulysses was
wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said,
“Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should like
to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes?
Did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?”

And Ulysses answered, “It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate
in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been
laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island
far away in the sea which is called ‘the Ogygian.’ Here dwells the
cunning and powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives by
herself far from all neighbours human or divine. Fortune, however,
brought me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck my
ship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My brave
comrades were drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and
was carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last
during the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the
Ogygian island where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in
and treated me with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me
immortal that I might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to
let her do so.

“I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the
good clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at
last when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free
will, either because Jove had told her she must, or because she had
changed her mind. She sent me from her island on a raft, which she
provisioned with abundance of bread and wine. Moreover she gave me good
stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and fair. Days
seven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I caught
sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast—and glad
indeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still much
trouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go no
further, and raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly
high that I could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under
the fury of the gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current
brought me to your shores.

“There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and the
waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam
on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place,
for there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then,
I got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. Night was
coming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where I
covered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me off
into a very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I slept among the
leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when I woke
as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’s maid servants playing
upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess. I
besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition,
much more so than could be expected from so young a person—for young
people are apt to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine,
and when she had had me washed in the river she also gave me the
clothes in which you see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me to
do so, I have told you the whole truth.”

Then Alcinous said, “Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to
bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she
was the first person whose aid you asked.”

“Pray do not scold her,” replied Ulysses; “she is not to blame. She did
tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid,
for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Every
human being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable.”

“Stranger,” replied Alcinous, “I am not the kind of man to get angry
about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father
Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are,
and how much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my
daughter, and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you a
house and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here
against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attend
tomorrow to the matter of your escort. You can sleep64 during the whole
voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters
either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be a
long way further off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it
when they took yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of
Gaia, tell me is the furthest of any place—and yet they did the whole
voyage in a single day without distressing themselves, and came back
again afterwards. You will thus see how much my ships excel all others,
and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are.”

Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “Father Jove, grant that
Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable
name among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country.”

Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the
room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to
spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to
wear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when
they had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and said, “Rise, sir
stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready,” and glad indeed was
he to go to his rest.

So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway;
but Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his
wife by his side.




BOOK VIII


BANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF ALCINOUS—THE GAMES.


Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous
and Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaeacian place
of assembly, which was near the ships. When they got there they sat
down side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Minerva took the
form of one of Alcinous’ servants, and went round the town in order to
help Ulysses to get home. She went up to the citizens, man by man, and
said, “Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, come to the
assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off a
long voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks like an immortal
god.”

With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to
the assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every one
was struck with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified
him about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter
than he really was, that he might impress the Phaeacians favourably as
being a very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trials
of skill to which they would challenge him. Then, when they were got
together, Alcinous spoke:

“Hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians,
that I may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he may be,
has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East or
West. He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. Let us
then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him;
indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain
of me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us draw a ship into
the sea—one that has never yet made a voyage—and man her with two and
fifty of our smartest young sailors. Then when you have made fast your
oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to
prepare a feast.65 I will find you in everything. I am giving these
instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regards
you aldermen and town councillors, you will join me in entertaining our
guest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses, and we will have
Demodocus to sing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he may
choose to sing about.”

Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a
servant went to fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went to
the sea shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drew
the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound the
oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due
course, and spread the white sails aloft. They moored the vessel a
little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the house
of King Alcinous. The out houses,66 yards, and all the precincts were
filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and
Alcinous killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two
oxen. These they skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent
banquet.

A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse had
dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though
she had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him of
his eyesight. Pontonous set a seat for him among the guests, leaning it
up against a bearing-post. He hung the lyre for him on a peg over his
head, and showed him where he was to feel for it with his hands. He
also set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his side, and a cup
of wine from which he might drink whenever he was so disposed.

The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before
them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse
inspired Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a
matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel
between Ulysses and Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on
one another as they sat together at a banquet. But Agamemnon was glad
when he heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for Apollo
had foretold him this at Pytho when he crossed the stone floor to
consult the oracle. Here was the beginning of the evil that by the will
of Jove fell both upon Danaans and Trojans.

Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head
and covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see that
he was weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears from
his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a
drink-offering to the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus
to sing further, for they delighted in his lays, then Ulysses again
drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly. No one noticed his
distress except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy
sighs that he was heaving. So he at once said, “Aldermen and town
councillors of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the
feast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us
proceed therefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his
return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all
other nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners.”

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. A
servant hung Demodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the
cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief
men of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd of several
thousands of people followed them, and there were many excellent
competitors for all the prizes. Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus,
Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineus,
and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was also Euryalus
son of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best looking
man among the Phaeacians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous,
Laodamas, Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.

The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from the
starting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew
forward at the same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way; he
left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a
couple of mules can plough in a fallow field.67 They then turned to the
painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to be the best man.
Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the
disc there was no one who could approach Elatreus. Alcinous’s son
Laodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said, when
they had all been diverted with the games, “Let us ask the stranger
whether he excels in any of these sports; he seems very powerfully
built; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength,
nor is he at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is
nothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong
he is.”

“You are quite right, Laodamas,” replied Euryalus, “go up to your guest
and speak to him about it yourself.”

When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd
and said to Ulysses, “I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for
some one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of
them—and you must have gone in for many a one before now. There is
nothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as the
showing himself a proper man with his hands and feet. Have a try
therefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. Your
return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn
into the water, and the crew is found.”

Ulysses answered, “Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mind
is set rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite
trouble, and am come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king
and people to further me on my return home.”

Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, “I gather, then, that you
are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in.
I suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships
as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward
freights and homeward cargoes. There does not seem to be much of the
athlete about you.”

“For shame, Sir,” answered Ulysses, fiercely, “you are an insolent
fellow—so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in
speech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence, but
heaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he charms
every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with
him so that he is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever
he goes he is looked up to. Another may be as handsome as a god, but
his good looks are not crowned with discretion. This is your case. No
god could make a finer looking fellow than you are, but you are a fool.
Your ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly angry, and you are
quite mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic exercises; indeed,
so long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes of
the age. Now, however, I am worn out by labour and sorrow, for I have
gone through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of the
weary sea; still, in spite of all this I will compete, for your taunts
have stung me to the quick.”

So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc,
larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians
when disc-throwing among themselves.68 Then, swinging it back, he threw
it from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as he
did so. The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it
sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been
made yet. Minerva, in the form of a man, came and marked the place
where it had fallen. “A blind man, Sir,” said she, “could easily tell
your mark by groping for it—it is so far ahead of any other. You may
make your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian can come near
to such a throw as yours.”

Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on, so
he began to speak more pleasantly. “Young men,” said he, “come up to
that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or even
heavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I
am exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what
it is, with any man of you all except Laodamas, but not with him
because I am his guest, and one cannot compete with one’s own personal
friend. At least I do not think it a prudent or a sensible thing for a
guest to challenge his host’s family at any game, especially when he is
in a foreign country. He will cut the ground from under his own feet if
he does; but I make no exception as regards any one else, for I want to
have the matter out and know which is the best man. I am a good hand at
every kind of athletic sport known among mankind. I am an excellent
archer. In battle I am always the first to bring a man down with my
arrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me.
Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I could when
we Achaeans were before Troy and in practice. I far excel every one
else in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of
the earth, but I should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such
as Hercules, or Eurytus the Oechalian—men who could shoot against the
gods themselves. This in fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by his
end, for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challenged
him as an archer. I can throw a dart farther than any one else can
shoot an arrow. Running is the only point in respect of which I am
afraid some of the Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been brought
down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I am still
weak.”

They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, “Sir, we
have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which
I understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been
displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one
of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who
knows how to talk with propriety. I hope you will apprehend my meaning,
and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining with
yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary
aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are not particularly
remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly
fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond of good
dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen,
warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best
dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be
able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as
sailors, runners, dancers, and minstrels. Demodocus has left his lyre
at my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him.”

On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house,
and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It was
their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so they
made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers.
Presently the servant came back with Demodocus’s lyre, and he took his
place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town
began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted with the
merry twinkling of their feet.

Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how
they first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venus
many presents, and defiled King Vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who
saw what they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when he
heard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief,
got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains
which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there
in that place.69 When he had finished his snare he went into his
bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs;
he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not even
a god could see them so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he had
spread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting
out for the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was
the one he was most fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and as
soon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love
for Venus.

Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was
about sitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he took
her hand in his own, “Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at
home, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is
barbarous.”

She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,
whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread
for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too
late that they were in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had
turned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun told him
what was going on. He was in a furious passion, and stood in the
vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the gods.

“Father Jove,” he cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live for
ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that I
will show you. Jove’s daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because
I am lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built,
whereas I am a cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not I;
they ought never to have begotten me. Come and see the pair together
asleep on my bed. It makes me furious to look at them. They are very
fond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there longer than
they can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there,
however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave
him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest.”

On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling
Neptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the
goddesses staid at home all of them for shame. Then the givers of all
good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with
inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had been,
whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:

“Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See how
limping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god
in heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages.”

Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, “Messenger
Mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains
were, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?”

“King Apollo,” answered Mercury, “I only wish I might get the chance,
though there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, all
of you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I could.”

The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune
took it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free
again. “Let him go,” he cried, “and I will undertake, as you require,
that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among
the immortal gods.”

“Do not,” replied Vulcan, “ask me to do this; a bad man’s bond is bad
security; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should go
away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?”

“Vulcan,” said Neptune, “if Mars goes away without paying his damages,
I will pay you myself.” So Vulcan answered, “In this case I cannot and
must not refuse you.”

Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were
free they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to
Cyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with
burnt offerings. Here the Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil
of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her
in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.

Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were
charmed as they heard him.

Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no
one to compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus had
made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up
towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and
caught it with ease before it came down again. When they had done
throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at
the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one
another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a great
stamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said:

“King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the
world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was
astonished as I saw them.”

The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians,
“Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of
singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he
may reasonably expect. There are twelve chief men among you, and
counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean
cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in
a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so with
a light heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology
and a present too, for he has been rude.”

Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and
sent their servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, “King
Alcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. He
shall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of
silver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into
which it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him.”

As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, “Good
luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the
winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return,
for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gone
through much hardship.”

To which Ulysses answered, “Good luck to you too my friend, and may the
gods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword you
have given me along with your apology.”

With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards
sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of
the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his
sons received them, and placed them under their mother’s charge. Then
Alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.

“Wife,” said he, turning to Queen Arete, “Go, fetch the best chest we
have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on the
fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to
the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made
him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that
will follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet—which is of
exquisite workmanship—that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his
life whenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any of the
gods.”70

Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast
as they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a
clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became
hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod.71 Meanwhile
Arete brought a magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it she
packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the
Phaeacians had brought. Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt from
Alcinous, and said to Ulysses:

“See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for
fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your
ship.” 72

When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast
with a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper
servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very glad
of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since he
left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her had
taken as good care of him as though he had been a god. When the
servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him
a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the guests
who were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the
bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as
she saw him pass. “Farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget me when
you are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransom
for having saved your life.”

And Ulysses said, “Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove the
mighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I
bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved
me.”

When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was
then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in the
favourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near
one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean
against it. Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of
fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant,
“Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for
all the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the less;
bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse
teaches them their songs and loves them.”

The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took
it and was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the good
things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and
drink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, “Demodocus, there is no one in the
world whom I admire more than I do you. You must have studied under the
Muse, Jove’s daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do you sing the
return of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. If you
were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who
was. Now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse
which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses got
by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men who
afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will
tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”

The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some
of the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others,
hidden within the horse,73 were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan
place of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse into
their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it,
and were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were for
breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top
of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the
precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering
and propitiation for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the
end, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which
were all the bravest of the Argives waiting to bring death and
destruction on the Trojans. Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans
issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their
ambuscade. He sang how they overran the city hither and thither and
ravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with Menelaus
to the house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged most
furiously, nevertheless by Minerva’s help he was victorious.

All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his
cheeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws
herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city
and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. She
screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping for
breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back
and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour and
sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously did
Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
that he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:

“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease
his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. From
the moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our
guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is evidently in
great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy
ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much more as it should
be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we
are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any one
with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought to
treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.

“Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor
reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more
polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your
father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were
known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. There is no one,
neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for
people’s fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.
Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape
their purpose accordingly and take you there. For the Phaeacians have
no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nations
have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are
thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the
whole world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is
covered with mist and cloud, so that there is no danger of being
wrecked or coming to any harm. Still I do remember hearing my father
say that Neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the
matter of giving people escorts. He said that one of these days he
should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted
some one,74 and bury our city under a high mountain. This is what my
father used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or no
is a matter which he will decide for himself.

“And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, and
in what countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples
themselves, and of their cities—who were hostile, savage and
uncivilised, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. Tell us
also why you are made so unhappy on hearing about the return of the
Argive Danaans from Troy. The gods arranged all this, and sent them
their misfortunes in order that future generations might have something
to sing about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when you
were before Troy? a son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearest
relations a man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some
brave and kindly-natured comrade—for a good friend is as dear to a man
as his own brother?”




BOOK IX


ULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY—-THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI,
AND CYCLOPES.


And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard
with such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or
more delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the
guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every
man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however,
since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my
own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor
yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has
been laid heavily upon me.

“Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and
one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though
I live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes,
renowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame
ascends to heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountain
called Neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is a
group of islands very near to one another—Dulichium, Same, and the
wooded island of Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all highest
up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it
towards dawn.75 It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my
eyes know none that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso
kept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also
the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could neither of them
persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than his own country
and his parents, and however splendid a home he may have in a foreign
country, if it be far from father or mother, he does not care about it.
Now, however, I will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by
Jove’s will I met with on my return from Troy.

“When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which is
the city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people to
the sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided
equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. I
then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very
foolishly would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine and
killing great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile the
Cicons cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland. These were
more in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of
war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the
occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as
leaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so
that we were hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships,
and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.76 So long
as the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against
them, though they were more in number than we; but as the sun went
down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons got the
better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship we had; so
we got away with those that were left.

“Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have
escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we
had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the
hands of the Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it
blew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and
night sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before the
gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took
them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the
land. There we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from
toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again
raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and
steersmen direct our ship. I should have got home at that time unharmed
had not the North wind and the currents been against me as I was
doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of
Cythera.

“I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the
sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, who
live on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to take
in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near
the ships. When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of my company to
see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had a
third man under them. They started at once, and went about among the
Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus,
which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about
home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to
them, but were for staying and munching lotus77 with the Lotus-eaters
without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they
wept bitterly I forced them back to the ships and made them fast under
the benches. Then I told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of
them should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so
they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.

“We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of
the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor
plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and
grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes
yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They have no
laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of
high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no
account of their neighbours.

“Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quite
close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is over-run
with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never
disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen—who as a rule will suffer so
much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices—do not go there,
nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness
untilled and unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon it
but only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights who
could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city,
or sail over the sea to one another’s country as people who have ships
can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island,78
for it is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season.
There are meadows that in some places come right down to the sea shore,
well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there
excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always
yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. There is a good
harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship be
moored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vessel and stay there
till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head of
the harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and
there are poplars growing all round it.

“Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have
brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick mist
hung all round our ships;79 the moon was hidden behind a mass of clouds
so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for it, nor
were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we
found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the
ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach
till daybreak.

“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired the
island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove’s daughters
roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. On
this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and
dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. Heaven
sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship got
nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to
the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plenty
of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we
sacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. While we
were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the
Cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires.
We could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their
sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we
camped down upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.

“‘Stay here, my brave fellows,’ said I, ‘all the rest of you, while I
go with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if they
are uncivilised savages, or a hospitable and humane race.’

“I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers;
so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. When
we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff
near the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It was a
station for a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a large
yard, with a high wall round it made of stones built into the ground
and of trees both pine and oak. This was the abode of a huge monster
who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. He would have
nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He was
a horrid creature, not like a human being at all, but resembling rather
some crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high
mountain.

“I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all
but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. I
also took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by
Maron, son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god of
Ismarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. When we
were sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also
his wife and child; so he made me some presents of great value—seven
talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet
wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man nor maid
in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and one
housekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of
wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that
it was impossible to refrain from drinking. I filled a large skin with
this wine, and took a wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind
misgave me that I might have to deal with some savage who would be of
great strength, and would respect neither right nor law.

“We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went
inside and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were
loaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could
hold. They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets,
then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones80
all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels,
bowls, and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey.
When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal some
cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return,
drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with
them. It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I would
not listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope
that he might give me a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men
found him ill to deal with.

“We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of
them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his
sheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood
to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noise
on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far
end of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well as
the she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams
and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled a huge stone to the
mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled
waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the
doorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats,
all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young. He
curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the
other half he poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper.
When he had got through with all his work, he lit the fire, and then
caught sight of us, whereon he said:

“‘Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or do
you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and
every man’s hand against you?’

“We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
form, but I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy,
but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far
out of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who
has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
a city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to show
us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors
may reasonably expect. May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven,
for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellers
under his protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and
foreigners in distress.’

“To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, ‘Stranger,’ said he, ‘you
are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me,
indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do
not care about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so
much stronger than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your
companions out of any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for
doing so. And now tell me where you made your ship fast when you came
on shore. Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the
land?’

“He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in
that way, so I answered with a lie; ‘Neptune,’ said I, ‘sent my ship on
to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We were
driven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me
escaped the jaws of death.’

“The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a
sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed
upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore
them limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like a
lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without
leaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to
heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else to
do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed
down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched
himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep.
I was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into
his vitals, but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be
lost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monster
had put in front of the door. So we stayed sobbing and sighing where we
were till morning came.

“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lit
his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let
each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his
work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
morning’s meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone
away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back
again—as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a
quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried
‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so I
was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself
with glory.

“In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: The
Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it
was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a
staff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could only
compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this club
and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and
told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire
to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was
lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of
them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the
monster’s eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom
I should have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch
came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—this
time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I
suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have prompted him
to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against the
door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and
then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all
this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off
them. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my
hands:

“‘Look here, Cyclops,’ said I, you have been eating a great deal of
man’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a
drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and
further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and
raving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can
you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this
way?’

“He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste of
the wine that he begged me for another bowl full. ‘Be so kind,’ he
said, ‘as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I want
to make you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even
in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but
this drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.’

“I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him,
and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I
saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as
I could: ‘Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me,
therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what
my father and mother and my friends have always called me.’

“But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat all Noman’s comrades
before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the
present that I will make him.’

“As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon
him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets
of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.
Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and
encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When the
wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the
fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had
filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beam
into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept
turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship’s
plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on
turning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam
into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked
it round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded
his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the
fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to
temper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and it makes a
great hiss as he does so, even thus did the Cyclops’ eye hiss round the
beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. We
ran away in a fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore
from his eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain,
shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak
headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave
when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.

“‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such a noise,
breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able
to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man is
trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’

“But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘Noman is killing
me by fraud; no man is killing me by force.’

“‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when
Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray
to your father Neptune.’

“Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my
clever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain,
felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from the
door; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it
to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might be
foolish enough to attempt this.

“As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own
life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who
knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In
the end I deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were
well grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them
noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which the
wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under the middle
sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there were
three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer than any
of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in
the thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece,
face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time.

“Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep
hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens
waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they
stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were
underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy
with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, Polyphemus laid
hold of it and said:

“‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the
mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are
the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is
it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because
that wicked Noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and
blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand and
talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash
his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. I should
thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has done
me.’

“As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way
out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram’s belly,
and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them
down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who
had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed.
However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to
hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once
and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote
the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out as my
voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.

“‘Cyclops,’ said I, ‘you should have taken better measure of your man
before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up your
visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin would
find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.’

“He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from
off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it
was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder.81 The sea quaked
as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us
back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But I
snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men
by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they
laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were before, I
was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of
me to hold my tongue.

“‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savage
creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us
back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of
us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have
pounded our heads and our ship’s timbers into a jelly with the rugged
rocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.’

“But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
‘Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of
Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.’

“On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas, alas, then the old prophecy
about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a man
both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an
excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he
grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, and
said I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been all
along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength,
whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has
managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come
here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my
hospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey—for
Neptune and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me,
which no one else neither god nor man can do.’

“Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and
sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more
than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.’

“On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
saying, ‘Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begotten
son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must
get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man’s ship
and find trouble in his house.’82

“Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up a
rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within a
little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock
fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on
our way towards the shore of the island.

“When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our
return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the
sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops’ sheep, and divided them
equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As for
the ram, my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share;
so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones to
Jove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and only
thought how he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.

“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on
dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingered
Dawn appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed
on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
had lost our comrades.




BOOK X


AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.


“Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son of
Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it
were) upon the sea,83 iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolus
has six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry the
daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,
feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day long
the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats
till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their
well made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. These
were the people among whom we had now come.

“Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the
time about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. I
told him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I must
go, and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort of
difficulty, but set about doing so at once. Moreover, he flayed me a
prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut up
in the hide as in a sack—for Jove had made him captain over the winds,
and he could stir or still each one of them according to his own
pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly
with a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow
from any quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let
blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through
our own folly.

“Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native
land showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the
stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light
sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we
might get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking among
themselves, and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack
that Aeolus had given me. ‘Bless my heart,’ would one turn to his
neighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends to
whatever city or country he may go. See what fine prizes he is taking
home from Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as he has,
come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now Aeolus has
given him ever so much more. Quick—let us see what it all is, and how
much gold and silver there is in the sack he gave him.’

“Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack,
whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried
us weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, and
knew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make
the best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the
ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our
fleet back to the Aeolian island.

“When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by
the ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men
and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting
with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the
threshold. They were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘Ulysses,
what brings you here? What god has been ill-treating you? We took great
pains to further you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever it was
that you wanted to go to.’

“Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, ‘My men have undone
me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me this
mischief, for you can if you will.’

“I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their
father answered, ‘Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the
island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for you
come here as one abhorred of heaven.’ And with these words he sent me
sorrowing from his door.

“Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and
fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six
days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the
rocky stronghold of Lamus—Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians,
where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]
salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last
answers the salute. In that country a man who could do without sleep
might earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as a
shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day.84

“When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep
cliffs, with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took
all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for
there was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was always
dead calm. I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the
very end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, but
could see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising
from the ground. So I sent two of my company with an attendant to find
out what sort of people the inhabitants were.

“The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the
people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till
presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water,
and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going
to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, and
when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of
that country might be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so she
directed them to her father’s house, but when they got there they found
his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they were
horrified at the sight of her.

“She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly,
and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them,
and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other
two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates
raised a hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians
sprang up from every quarter—ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at
us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard the
horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the
death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like fishes
and took them home to eat them. While they were thus killing my men
within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and
told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare like
the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough
when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at
us. As for the others there was not one of them left.

“Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had
lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives—a
great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes—for
they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus.
We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some god
guided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two
nights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of the third day
came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to
reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork, or
hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high look-out I
espied the smoke of Circe’s house rising upwards amid a dense forest of
trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, I
would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed it
best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some
of them instead of going myself.

“When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my
path. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck him
in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean
through him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of
him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and
laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them
into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the four
feet of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round my
neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag
was much too big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder,
steadying him with one hand. As I threw him down in front of the ship,
I called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘Look
here my friends,’ said I, ‘we are not going to die so much before our
time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have
got something to eat and drink on board.’ On this they uncovered their
heads upon the sea shore and admired the stag, for he was indeed a
splendid fellow. Then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him
sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.

“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it
came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends,
we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no
idea where the sun either sets or rises,85 so that we do not even know
East from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and
find one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as I could
this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the horizon; it
lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out of a thick
forest of trees.’

“Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had
been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogre
Polyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing
to be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a
captain over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while I took
command of the other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lot
fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they
wept, as also did we who were left behind.

“When they reached Circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, on
a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. There
were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor
bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
into subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their great
tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against
them.86 As hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming
from dinner—for they know he will bring them something—even so did
these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the
men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.
Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as they
stood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as
she worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such
dazzling colours as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites,
whom I valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘There
is some one inside working at a loom and singing most beautifully; the
whole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is
woman or goddess.’

“They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them
enter. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, who
suspected mischief and staid outside. When she had got them into her
house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with
cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked
poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she
turned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her
pig-styes. They were like pigs—head, hair, and all, and they grunted
just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they
remembered everything.

“Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some
acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to
tell me about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome with
dismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so;
his eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at last
we forced his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to the
others.

“‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in the
middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place
that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was a
goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to
her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and
invited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed
her into the house, but I staid where I was, for I thought there might
be some treachery. From that moment I saw them no more, for not one of
them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching for them.’

“Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I also
took my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me the
way. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously,
saying, ‘Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, for
I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return
alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with
the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.’

“‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I, ‘eating and drinking at the
ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.’

“With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through the
charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, I
met Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the
hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face. He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘My
poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone
and without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in Circe’s pigstyes,
like so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not fancy that
you can set them free? I can tell you that you will never get back and
will have to stay there with the rest of them. But never mind, I will
protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this herb, which
is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe’s
house, it will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief.

“‘And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will try
to practice upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she
will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to
charm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will
prevent her spells from working. I will tell you all about it. When
Circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as
though you were going to kill her. She will then be frightened, and
will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank
refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to take
good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all
the blessed gods that she will plot no further mischief against you, or
else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for
nothing.’

“As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what it
was like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk;
the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods
can do whatever they like.

“Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island;
but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with
care as I walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and
called the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down, opened
the door, and asked me to come in; so I followed her—much troubled in
my mind. She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver,
there was a footstool also under my feet, and she mixed a mess in a
golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me
mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without its
charming me, she struck me with her wand. ‘There now,’ she cried, ‘be
off to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’

“But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her,
whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke
piteously, saying, ‘Who and whence are you? from what place and people
have you come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you?
Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I
gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than
the bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some day
with his ship while on his way home from Troy; so be it then; sheathe
your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to
trust each other.’

“And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with you
when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that you
have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to
bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall
certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take
your solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.’

“So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed her
oath then I went to bed with her.

“Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their
work. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the
holy waters that run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair
purple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it. Another
brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of
gold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and put
golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set
it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted.
When the water in the cauldron was boiling,87 she poured cold into it
till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and began
washing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the
tire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had done washing me
and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt and
led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a
footstool also under my feet. A maid servant then brought me water in a
beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to wash
my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servant
brought me bread and offered me many things of what there was in the
house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat without
heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.

“When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief,
she came to me and said, ‘Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though
you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and
drink? Is it that you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I
have already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.’

“And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think
of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his
friends free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, you
must free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my own
eyes.’

“When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wand
in her hand and opened the pigstye doors. My men came out like so many
prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and
anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad
drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than
they were before, and much taller and better looking. They knew me at
once, seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the
whole house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, and
Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and said,
‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where you
have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide all
your ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with
your men.’

“I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men
at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me the
silly blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break out
and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be
milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds
with their lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though they had got
back to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been born and bred.
‘Sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see you back
as though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all about the
fate of our comrades.’

“I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We must draw our ship on to
the land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave;
then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe’s house, where
you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great
abundance.’

“On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried
to hold them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches that we are, what will
become of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who
will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to
keep guard over her house. Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our
comrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them. It was all
through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.’

“When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen
blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his
being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and
said, ‘Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the
ship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe’s house.’

“On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after
all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand
that I had given him.

“Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind
were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them
woollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all
comfortably at dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each other
face to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud
till the whole palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said,
‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; I
know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have
fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so
stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and
hearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you are
weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the
hardships you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no
more cheerfulness left in you.’

“Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a whole
twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. But
when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had
come round, my men called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you began
to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your
house and native country at all.’

“Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong day
to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but
when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down
to sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bed
with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what
I had got to say. ‘Circe,’ said I, ‘please to keep the promise you made
me about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and so
do my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon
as ever your back is turned.’

“And the goddess answered, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall
none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is
another journey which you have got to take before you can sail
homewards. You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to
consult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias, whose reason
is still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine left his understanding
even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.’

“I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and would
gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently
when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, ‘And who
shall guide me upon this voyage—for the house of Hades is a port that
no ship can reach.’

“‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set your
white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there of
itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you will
reach the fertile shore of Proserpine’s country with its groves of tall
poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your
ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of
Hades. You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon
and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron,
and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run
into one another.

“‘When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench a
cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a
drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then
wine, and in the third place water—sprinkling white barley meal over
the whole. Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble
ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you will
sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the
pyre with good things. More particularly you must promise that
Teiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all
your flocks.

“‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer
them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; but
yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the
river. On this, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you must
tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and
offer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and to
Proserpine. Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any
other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before Teiresias
shall have answered your questions. The seer will presently come to
you, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are to make,
and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home.’

“It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me
in my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light
gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle
round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I went
about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to
each of them man by man: ‘You must not lie sleeping here any longer,’
said I to them, ‘we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.’
And on this they did as I bade them.

“Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We had
with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or
courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the
rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard the
noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot
all about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right off
the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of
Hades.

“When I had got the men together I said to them, ‘You think you are
about to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead
of this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to
consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.’

“The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on
the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend
matters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting
our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard
by the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,
for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does not
wish to be seen?




BOOK XI


THE VISIT TO THE DEAD.88


“Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the
water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on
board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.
Circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew
dead aft and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well
filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear and let her
go as the wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails were
full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down
and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the
river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live
enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce
neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but
the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there
we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the
waters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us.

“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword
and dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the
dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with
water, and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying
earnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I
got back to Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best
I had, and would load the pyre with good things. I also particularly
promised that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best
in all my flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the
throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon
the ghosts came trooping up from Erebus—brides,89 young bachelors, old
men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave
men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched
with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench
with a strange kind of screaming sound that made me turn pale with
fear. When I saw them coming I told the men to be quick and flay the
carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and
at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but I
sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor feckless
ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered my
questions.

“The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had
not yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and
unburied in Circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do. I was
very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: ‘Elpenor,’ said I, ‘how
did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have got here
on foot quicker than I have with my ship.’

“‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own
unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe’s
house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase
but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to
the house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have
left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father
who brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the
one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when
you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean
island. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or
I may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I
have, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in
days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave
the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.’
And I said, ‘My poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.’

“Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the
one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the
ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her
alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her,
but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood
till I had asked my questions of Teiresias.

“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre
in his hand. He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why,
poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the
dead in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your
sword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’

“So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of
the blood he began with his prophecy.

“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will
make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye of
Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you
can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging
to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these
flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet
after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn
you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even though
you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all
your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your
house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring
your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to
your wife.

“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you
must take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a
country where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even
mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and
oars that are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain
token which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and
will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a
ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune.90 Then go home and offer hecatombs
to all the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death
shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very
gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people
shall bless you. All that I have said will come true].’91

“‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and
tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she
is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own
son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can
make her know me.’

“‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of the
blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let
them have any blood they will go away again.’

“On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for
his prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until
my mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and
spoke fondly to me, saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to this
abode of darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for the
living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and
terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot,
but he must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time trying
to find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to
Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’

“‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean
land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one
long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with
Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans.
But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a
long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to
eternity? Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind
me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold
of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me again
what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with
my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she
could and married again?’

“My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, but she is
in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain
largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a
magistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at his
old place in the country and never goes near the town. He has no
comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in
front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in
summer, when the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the
vineyard on a bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground. He
grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more
and more as he grows older. As for my own end it was in this wise:
heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was
I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out
and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force
of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93

“Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.
Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and
being touched to the quick I said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not stay
still when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one
another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of
grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?’

“‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when
they are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together;
these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has
left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now,
however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all
these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’

“Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds
about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned
her told me her race and lineage.

“The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of
Cretheus the son of Aeolus.94 She fell in love with the river Enipeus
who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she
was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her
lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave
arched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god,
whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber.
When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his
own and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods
are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve
months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold
your tongue and do not tell any one.’

“Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and
Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was a
great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in
Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson,
Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.

“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of
having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two
sons Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and
built a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not
hold Thebes till they had walled it.

“Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove
indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon,
and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.

“I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it
was to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after
having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to
the world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the
spite the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of the
mighty jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging
spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother—to his ruing bitterly
thereafter.

“Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given
priceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of
Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore
Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus
would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from
the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The only man
who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer,95 but
the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle
caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year had
passed and the same season came round again, Iphicles set him at
liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven. Thus, then,
was the will of Jove accomplished.

“And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these
heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a
special dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one
of them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of
gods.

“After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace of
Neptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short
lived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. They
threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount
Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa,
that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if
they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them,
before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks or
chin.

“Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the
magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but
he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the
island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.

“I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own
husband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name
every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and
it is time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or
here. As for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it.”

Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:—

“What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and good
looking, and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you
share in the distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor
niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need,
for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance.”

Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
them, “My friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to us
is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;
but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King
Alcinous.”

“The thing shall be done,” exclaimed Alcinous, “as surely as I still
live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious to
get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean
to give him. As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, and
mine above all others as the chief person among you.”

And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay
here for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded
with your noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound
greatly to my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own
people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me
when I get back to Ithaca.”

“Ulysses,” replied Alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any idea
that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people
going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see
through them, but there is a style about your language which assures me
of your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your own
misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practiced
bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty
heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed
time—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay here
listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell
us of your adventures.”

“Alcinous,” answered Ulysses, “there is a time for making speeches, and
a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not
refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades
who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their
return, through the treachery of a wicked woman.

“When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the
ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by
those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as
he had tasted the blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out
his arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance
any more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him. ‘How did you
come by your death,’ said I, ‘King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his
winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies
make an end of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or
sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wives
and city?’

“‘Ulysses,’ he answered, ‘noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at sea
in any storm of Neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the
mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between
them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most
miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while all
around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding
breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. You
must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or
in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the
way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. I
heard Priam’s daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her
close beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body,
and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slipped
away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I was
dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as
a woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancy
murdering her own husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home by
my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought
disgrace on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the good
ones.’

“And I said, ‘In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to
last in the matter of their women’s counsels. See how many of us fell
for Helen’s sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief
against you too during your absence.’

“‘Be sure, therefore,’ continued Agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendly
even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly
well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about
the rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for
Penelope is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We
left her a young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for
Troy. This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man’s estate,96
and he and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one
another as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not
even allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I
could do so. Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart—do not
tell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal a
march upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women. But now
tell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes?
Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus—for
I presume that he is still living.’

“And I said, ‘Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether your
son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not
know.’

“As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the
ghost of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax
who was the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son
of Peleus. The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously,
saying, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you
undertake next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among us
silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?’

“And I said, ‘Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the
Achaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me
about my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get
near the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
in trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so
fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by
all us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you
are a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it so much
to heart even if you are dead.’

“‘Say not a word,’ he answered, ‘in death’s favour; I would rather be a
paid servant in a poor man’s house and be above ground than king of
kings among the dead. But give me news about my son; is he gone to the
wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also if
you have heard anything about my father Peleus—does he still rule among
the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas and
Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand by
his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I
killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy—could I but be as
I then was and go even for a short time to my father’s house, any one
who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’

“‘I have heard nothing,’ I answered, ‘of Peleus, but I can tell you all
about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros
with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was always
first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the
only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, but
would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many a man
did he kill in battle—I cannot name every single one of those whom he
slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say how
he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the
handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the
Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman’s bribes. Moreover, when
all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had
made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the
door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and
chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every
limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek; he
was all the time urging me to break out from the horse—grasping the
handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury
against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his
handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the
fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear
nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.’

“When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a
meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the
prowess of his son.

“The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own
melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof—still
angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour
of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners
and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day in
such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all
the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.

“When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, ‘Ajax, will you not
forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to
lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much
as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid
on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for
it was this that made him counsel your destruction—come hither,
therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I can
tell you.’

“He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other
ghosts; nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his
being so angry, or I should have gone on talking to him,97 only that
there were still others among the dead whom I desired to see.

“Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his
sentences upon them.

“After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the
ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he
had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.

“And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering
some nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were
digging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them
off with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove’s mistress
Leto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.

“I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that
reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it
dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parched
by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shed
their fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and
juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to
take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.

“And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
with both his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the
top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to
the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless
stone98 would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then he would
begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and
the steam rose after him.

“After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he
is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife,
who is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him
like scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with
his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around
as though ever on the point of taking aim. About his breast there was a
wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears,
wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle,
and death. The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never be
able to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once when he saw me,
and spoke piteously, saying, ‘My poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes,
are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was
above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of
suffering, for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a low
fellow who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch
the hell-hound—for he did not think he could find anything harder for
me than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him,
for Mercury and Minerva helped me.’

“On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed
where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom I
would fain have seen—Theseus and Pirithous—glorious children of the
gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such
appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send
up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. On
this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at
once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had to
row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.




BOOK XII


THE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.


“After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the
open sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is
dawn and sun-rise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to the
sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and
waited till day should break.

“Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sent
some men to Circe’s house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewood
from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we
had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. When
his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a
stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had
been used to row with.

“While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back
from the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she
could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and
wine. Then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a bold
thing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died
twice, to other people’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the
day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow
morning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about your course, and
will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from
misadventure either by land or sea.’

“We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day
to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on
dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the
ship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away from
the others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about our
adventures.

“‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my story, ‘and now pay
attention to what I am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, will
recall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens who
enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too close
and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will never
welcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to
death with the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of dead
men’s bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.
Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax that
none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you
may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross piece half
way up the mast,99 and they must lash the rope’s ends to the mast
itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you beg and
pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.

“‘When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you
coherent directions100 as to which of two courses you are to take; I
will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them
for yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against
which the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the
blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird may
pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove,
but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove has
to send another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came to
these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire
are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. The only
vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her way
from the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against these
great rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she bore
to Jason.

“‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a
dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not
even in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands and
twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer
up, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle of it there
is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must
take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the
stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside it Scylla sits and
yelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, but
in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one—not even a god—could face
her without being terror-struck. She has twelve mis-shapen feet, and
six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck
she has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very
close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment,
and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and
peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any
larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which
Amphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her without losing some
men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in
each mouth.

“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close
together that there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A large
fig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her
waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not
there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not
save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’

“‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, and at the same
time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’

“‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to
fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even
by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,
extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best
chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle
about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you
with a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of
your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out
lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will then
stop her from making a second raid upon you.’

“‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see
many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven
herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they
are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of
the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she had borne them
and had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which
was a long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocks
and herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but
getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you
harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and
of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will
return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’

“Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to
loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took
their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars.
Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair
wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails
well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, and
let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.

“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends, it
is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies
that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that
whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said
we were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully
in a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as
no one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half
way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I
cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mast
itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly
still.’

“I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached
the island of the two Sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.
Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of wind
nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed
them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam
they raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it
up small with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till
it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of
the sun-god son of Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all my men, and
they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upright on the
cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. When we had got within
earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate, the Sirens
saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.

“‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name,
and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us without
staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and he who listens
will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the
ills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, and
can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’

“They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them
further I made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me
free; but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes
bound me with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of
the Sirens’ voices. Then my men took the wax from their ears and
unbound me.

“Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from
which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men were
so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea
resounded with the rushing of the waters,103 but the ship stayed where
it was, for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, and
exhorted them man by man not to lose heart.

“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first time that we have been in
danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops
shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved
us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with might
and main. As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them,
for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming
rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over
yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’

“So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster
Scylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but would
huddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe’s
strict instructions—I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears
I took my stand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that I expected
first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much
harm; but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes
with looking the gloomy rock all over and over.

“Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand
was Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt
water. As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when
it is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of
the rocks on either side. When she began to suck again, we could see
the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made a deafening
sound as it broke against the rocks. We could see the bottom of the
whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wits
ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and were expecting
each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and
snatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and
men, and in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me,
struggling in the air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them
call out my name in one last despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated,
spear in hand, upon some jutting rock104 throws bait into the water to
deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox’s horn with
which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he
catches them one by one—even so did Scylla land these panting creatures
on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they
screamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony.
This was the most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.

“When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible
Charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the
goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at
sea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the
yards, and the sheep bleating. Then I remembered what the blind Theban
prophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had
warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. So being much
troubled I said to the men, ‘My men, I know you are hard pressed, but
listen while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and how
carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed
sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.
Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’

“The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an
insolent answer. ‘Ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are very
strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron,
and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you
will not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this
island, but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on
through the watches of the flying night. It is by night that the winds
blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one of
those sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which so often
wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? Now,
therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper here
hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put
out to sea.’

“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that
heaven meant us a mischief and said, ‘You force me to yield, for you
are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his
solemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock of
sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either, but
will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.’

“They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath
we made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh
water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon as
they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their
poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them
weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep.

“In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their
places, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that
land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out
of the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn,
appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave wherein
the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called the men
together in council.

“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let us
mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it;
for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives
ear to everything.’ And again they promised that they would obey.

“For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there was
no other wind, but only South and East.105 As long as corn and wine
held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,
however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to
go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking
whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. One
day, therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show me
some means of getting away. When I had gone far enough to be clear of
all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from the
wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by
and by they sent me off into a sweet sleep.

“Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘Listen
to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but there
is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the best of these
cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we ever get
back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it
with every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink our
ship out of revenge for these horned cattle, and the other gods are of
the same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water once for all and
have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such a desert
island as this is.’

“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle,
so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men,
therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them
saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of
barley-meal, for there was no barley left. When they had done praying
they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the
thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some
pieces of raw meat on top of them. They had no wine with which to make
drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept
pouring on a little water from time to time while the inward meats were
being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had
tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces
upon the spits.

“By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the ship
and to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat,
so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. ‘Father Jove,’ I
exclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you
have done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me;
see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’

“Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had
been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said to
the immortals, ‘Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in
everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses’ ship:
they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I
loved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again. If
they do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down to
Hades and shine there among the dead.’

“‘Sun,’ said Jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over
the fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with a
bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’

“I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the
mouth of Mercury.

“As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each
one of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the
cows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signs
and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and
the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether
cooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.

“For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon
them, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury
of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts,
spread sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from the
island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised
a black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. We did
not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by a
terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of the mast so
that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the bottom
of the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the
ship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and
he fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in
him.

“Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and
round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck
it. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water
round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently
deprived them of all chance of getting home again.

“I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel
(which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the
direction of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still
hanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together,
and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to
take me.

“[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got into
the South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to the
terrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually
happened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise
had reached the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking
down the salt sea water,106 but I was carried aloft toward the fig
tree, which I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could not
plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a
long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too
high, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung
patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft
again—and a very long while it seemed. A jury-man is not more glad to
get home to supper, after having been long detained in court by
troublesome cases, than I was to see my raft beginning to work its way
out of the whirlpool again. At last I let go with my hands and feet,
and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to which I then got,
and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of gods and
men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise I should have
certainly been lost.107

“Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the
gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and
powerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I need
say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about it
yesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over again.”




BOOK XIII


ULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.


Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous
began to speak.

“Ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house I doubt not you
will get home without further misadventure no matter how much you have
suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here night after
night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist
as follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought
gold,108 and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;
let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a
large tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy of a
general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the
burden of such a handsome present.”

Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his
own abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they
hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.
Alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the
ship’s benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers.
Then they went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and he
sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of all.
They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which
the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one, sang
to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as
though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way. As
one who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen
keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he
may go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so
did Ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and he at once said to the
Phaeacians, addressing himself more particularly to King Alcinous:

“Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send me
on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving
me an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I may
turn to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in peace
among friends,109 and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfaction
to your wives and children;110 may heaven vouchsafe you every good
grace, and may no evil thing come among your people.”

Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and
agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken
reasonably. Alcinous therefore said to his servant, “Pontonous, mix
some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to
father Jove, and speed our guest upon his way.”

Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others
each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that
live in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands
of queen Arete.

“Farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age and
death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now take
my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and
with king Alcinous.”

As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to
conduct him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some
maidservants with him—one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to
carry his strong box, and a third with corn and wine. When they got to
the water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with
all the meat and drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linen
sheet on deck that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship.
Then he too went on board and lay down without a word, but the crew
took every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone
to which it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea,
Ulysses fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.111

The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies
over the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curvetted as it
were the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water
seethed in her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even a
falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus,
then, she cut her way through the water, carrying one who was as
cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of
all that he had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves
of the weary sea.

When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show,
the ship drew near to land.112 Now there is in Ithaca a haven of the
old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line
of the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms of
wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship
may lie without being even moored. At the head of this harbour there is
a large olive tree, and at no great distance a fine overarching cavern
sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads.113 There are mixing bowls
within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover,
there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of
sea purple—very curious to see—and at all times there is water within
it. It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go down
into the cave, while the other comes from the South and is more
mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken
by the gods.

Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the
place.114 She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length
on to the shore;115 when, however, they had landed, the first thing
they did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the
ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they took
out the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him
when he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these all
together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear
some passer by116 might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and
then they made the best of their way home again.

But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already
threatened Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. “Father Jove,” said
he, “I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods,
if mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show
such small regard for me. I said I would let Ulysses get home when he
had suffered sufficiently. I did not say that he should never get home
at all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it, and
promised that he should do so; but now they have brought him in a ship
fast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him with more
magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would ever
have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil and
got home without misadventure.”

And Jove answered, “What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking
about? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would be
monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. As
regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and
treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal
with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please.”

“I should have done so at once,” replied Neptune, “if I were not
anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I
should like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from its
escort. This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I
should also like to bury their city under a huge mountain.”

“My good friend,” answered Jove, “I should recommend you at the very
moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,
to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This will
astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the
mountain.”

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where the
Phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid
way, had got close in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and
drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.
After this he went away.

The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn
towards his neighbour, saying, “Bless my heart, who is it that can have
rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could
see the whole of her only a moment ago.”

This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous
said, “I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that
Neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the
sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from
an escort, and bury our city under a high mountain. This was what my
old father used to say, and now it is all coming true.117 Now therefore
let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off giving
people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice
twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and not
bury our city under the high mountain.” When the people heard this they
were afraid and got ready the bulls.

Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune,
standing round his altar; and at the same time118 Ulysses woke up once
more upon his own soil. He had been so long away that he did not know
it again; moreover, Jove’s daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so
that people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell
him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and
friends recognising him119 until he had taken his revenge upon the
wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to
him—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the
goodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his
native land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and
cried aloud despairingly.

“Alas,” he exclaimed, “among what manner of people am I fallen? Are
they savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? Where shall I put
all this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had staid over
there with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other great
chief who would have been good to me and given me an escort. As it is I
do not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave it here for
fear somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth the chiefs and
rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have
left me in the wrong country; they said they would take me back to
Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliants
chastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who do
wrong. Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew have
gone off with any of them.”

He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his
clothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about
not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore of
the sounding sea bewailing his hard fate. Then Minerva came up to him
disguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a
good cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her
comely feet and held a javelin in her hand. Ulysses was glad when he
saw her, and went straight up to her.

“My friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom I have met with in
this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposed
towards me. Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace your
knees and pray to you as though you were a god. Tell me, then, and tell
me truly, what land and country is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am I
on an island, or is this the sea board of some continent?”

Minerva answered, “Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come
from somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is. It is
a very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West. It is
rugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no means a bad
island for what there is of it. It grows any quantity of corn and also
wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also and
goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places
where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of Ithaca is known
even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way off from this
Achaean country.”

Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own
country, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and
made up a lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.

“I heard of Ithaca,” said he, “when I was in Crete beyond the seas, and
now it seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have left as
much more behind me for my children, but am flying because I killed
Orsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete. I killed him
because he wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from Troy with so
much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves of
the weary sea; he said I had not served his father loyally at Troy as
vassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so I lay in wait
for him with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him as
he was coming into town from the country. It was a very dark night and
nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I had killed him, but
as soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought the owners, who
were Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or in Elis
where the Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them.
They meant no guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we
sailed on till we came hither by night. It was all we could do to get
inside the harbour, and none of us said a word about supper though we
wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were.
I was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of
the ship, and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the sand.
Then they sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress
of mind.”

Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.
Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, “He must be
indeed a shifty lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in all
manner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist. Dare
devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not
drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are
in your own country again? We will say no more, however, about this,
for we can both of us deceive upon occasion—you are the most
accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I for
diplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods. Did you not know
Jove’s daughter Minerva—me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch
over you in all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians take so
great a liking to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk things
over with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians
give you; I want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your
own house; you have got to face them, but tell no one, neither man nor
woman, that you have come home again. Bear everything, and put up with
every man’s insolence, without a word.”

And Ulysses answered, “A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but you
are so constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it is
a hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. This much,
however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as
we Achaeans were fighting before Troy, but from the day on which we
went on board ship after having sacked the city of Priam, and heaven
dispersed us—from that day, Minerva, I saw no more of you, and cannot
ever remember your coming to my ship to help me in a difficulty; I had
to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from evil and I
reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged me and took me
into the town.120 And now, I beseech you in your father’s name, tell me
the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in Ithaca. I am in
some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving me in all you
have been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really got back to my own
country?”

“You are always taking something of that sort in your head,” replied
Minerva, “and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions; you
are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on returning
from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife and
children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or
hearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife, who
remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night or
day for the tears she sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming near
you, I was never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would get back
safely though you would lose all your men, and I did not wish to
quarrel with my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded
his son.121 I will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land,
and you will then perhaps believe me. This is the haven of the old
merman Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of
it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;122 here too is the
overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable
hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum.”

As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. Then
Ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed
the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs,
saying, “Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never
again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving
salutations, and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, if
Jove’s redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my son to
manhood.”

“Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined Minerva,
“let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where
they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it all.”

Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding
places, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and
good clothing which the Phaeacians had given him. They stowed
everything carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door of
the cave. Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and
consulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.

“Ulysses,” said Minerva, “noble son of Laertes, think how you can lay
hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your
house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents
to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and
sending encouraging messages123 to every one of them, but meaning the
very opposite of all she says.”

And Ulysses answered, “In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have
come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you
had not given me such timely information. Advise me how I shall best
avenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as
on the day when we loosed Troy’s fair diadem from her brow. Help me now
as you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess,
will be with me.”

“Trust me for that,” said she, “I will not lose sight of you when once
we set about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouring
your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and
brains. I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shall
know you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your
yellow hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see
it with loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an
unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the
son whom you left behind you. Then go at once to the swineherd who is
in charge of your pigs; he has been always well affected towards you,
and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his
pigs near the rock that is called Raven124 by the fountain Arethusa,
where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their
manner. Stay with him and find out how things are going, while I
proceed to Sparta and see your son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon,
where he has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive.”125

“But why,” said Ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all about
it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship
while others are eating up his estate?”

Minerva answered, “Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be
well spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but is
staying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with
abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and are lying
in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I do
not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are
now eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves.”

As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with
wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over
his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine
ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him,
and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave
him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with
a staff and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him to
sling it over his shoulder.

When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess
went straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.




BOOK XIV


ULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.


Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the
place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was
the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his
hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be
seen from far. He had made them spacious126 and fair to see, with a
free run for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his
master’s absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground,
without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them
on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of
oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside he had
built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. There were
fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the
boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kept
on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he had
continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the
herdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always
with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of
sandals127 from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out herding
the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to town
with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they might
sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.

When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at
him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of
the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by
them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,
rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off
by shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Ulysses, “Old
man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you
would have got me into trouble. The gods have given me quite enough
worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am in
continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other people
to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving
in some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fill
of bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your
misfortunes.”

On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of
this he threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he
used to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,
and said “May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your
heart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have received
me.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult
him, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what
you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for
heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good
to me and given me something of my own—a house, a piece of land, a good
looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who
has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as
they have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown
old here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I
wish that Helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been
the death of many a good man. It was this matter that took my master to
Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of
king Agamemnon.”

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before
Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over
with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’s pork. The fat
pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or
scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and
respect those who do what is lawful and right. Even the fierce
freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and Jove gives them
their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got home
again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but
some god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone;
they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their
offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force,
without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they
sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his
wine, for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca
or on the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men
put together. I will tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of
cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also
twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him
twelve widely spreading herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even
large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the
charge of excellent goat herds. Each one of these sends the suitors the
best goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the
pigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I have
and sending it to them.”

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was
satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,
filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said
as he took it in his hands, “My friend, who was this master of yours
that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he
was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other gods
know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled
much.”

Eumaeus answered, “Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will
get Ulysses’ wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps in
want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a
word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my
mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes
much of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the
time as women will when they have lost their husbands. And you too, old
man, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty
story. But the wolves and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses to
pieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and his bones are
lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone,
and a bad business it is for all his friends—for me especially; go
where I may I shall never find so good a master, not even if I were to
go home to my mother and father where I was bred and born. I do not so
much care, however, about my parents now, though I should dearly like
to see them again in my own country; it is the loss of Ulysses that
grieves me most; I cannot speak of him without reverence though he is
here no longer, for he was very fond of me, and took such care of me
that wherever he may be I shall always honour his memory.”

“My friend,” replied Ulysses, “you are very positive, and very hard of
belief about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless I will not
merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anything
for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and
cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not take
anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire,
who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by the
rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now
come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will. Ulysses will
return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who
are ill treating his wife and son.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Old man, you will neither
get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink
your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep
on reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks
about my honoured master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but I
only wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and his
son Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his;
he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man,
face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has
been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get
news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is
coming home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a
name in Ithaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be
taken, or else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him
to protect him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also,
for I want to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of
your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew
brought you to Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come—for
you cannot have come by land.”

And Ulysses answered, “I will tell you all about it. If there were meat
and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do
but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily
talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of
the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.

“I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had many
sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had
purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax
(whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among
the Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put
me on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock.
When, however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided
his estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a
holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry
into a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the
field of battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw
you can see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to
spare. Mars and Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my
men to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much
as a thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear all whom I
could overtake. Such was I in battle, but I did not care about farm
work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring up children. My
delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows—things that most
men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and another
another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to. Before the
Achaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command of men and ships on
foreign service, and I amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil
in the first instance, and much more was allotted to me later on.

“My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, but
when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many
perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to
Troy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing
so. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked
the city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it
was that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily
with my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of
making a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it.
I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I
and my men made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice
to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board
and set sail from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were
going down a river. Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had
no sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the
wind and steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the river
Aegyptus; there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay
by them and keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre
from every point of vantage.

“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and
ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their
wives and children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and
when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the
plain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of
armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer
face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians
killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for
them. Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and I wish I had died
then and there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for
me—I took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand;
then I went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his knees and
kissed them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot,
and took me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashen
spears and tried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me,
for he feared the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who
punishes those who do evil.

“I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on
for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who
had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me
over into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and his
possessions lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at the
end of that time when months and days had gone by till the same season
had come round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on a
pretence that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, but
really that he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched. I
suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not
help it.

“The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea
that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled
their destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could
see nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and
the sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts
and the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and
brimstone as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into the sea;
they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so
many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of
getting home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent the ship’s
mast within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and
drifted before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the
darkness of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian
coast. There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably
without charging me anything at all—for his son found me when I was
nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand,
took me to his father’s house and gave me clothes to wear.

“There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he had
entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his
homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought
iron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep his family
for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.
But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’s
mind from the god’s high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret. Moreover the
king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as
he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,
that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however before
Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing
for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge
of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.

“These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the
very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from
land they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the
shirt and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered
old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they
reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with a
strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by
the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn
my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I
struck out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near
a thick wood in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my
having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they
thought it was no further use and went back to their ship. The gods,
having hidden me thus easily, then took me to a good man’s door—for it
seems that I am not to die yet awhile.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Poor unhappy stranger, I
have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but
that part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to
believe it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in this
way? I know all about the return of my master. The gods one and all of
them detest him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let him
die with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done;
for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and his
son would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have
spirited him away we know not whither.

“As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to
the town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news
about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those
who grieve over the king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it because
they can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part I
have never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was
taken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till
at last he reached my station, and I was very kind to him. He said he
had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships
which had been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in the
following summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back
much wealth. And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has
brought you to my door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain
hopes. It is not for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but
only out of respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and
pitying you.”

Ulysses answered, “I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a
bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master
comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to
Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will,
set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice,
as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies.”

“And a pretty figure I should cut then,” replied Eumaeus, “both now and
hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and
showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good
earnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will
come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper.”

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the
pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a
tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. But
Eumaeus called to his men and said, “Bring in the best pig you have,
that I may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of
him ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs,
while others reap the fruit of our labour.”

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine
fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not
forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the first
thing he did was to cut bristles from the pig’s face and throw them
into the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses might
return home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which
he had kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it,
while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, and
Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the
fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers;
they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits
and roasted them till they were done; when they had taken them off the
spits they threw them on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who
was a most equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. He
made seven portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son of
Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt
out to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthways
down the loin as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much
pleased. “I hope, Eumaeus,” said he, “that Jove will be as well
disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you are showing to an
outcast like myself.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Eat, my good fellow, and
enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,
just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses.”

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt
sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put
the cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man
on his own account from among the Taphians during his master’s absence,
and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good
things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and
drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all
went to bed after having made a hearty supper.

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It
poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which
is a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in
the excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and
give it him, or make one of his men give him one. “Listen to me,” said
he, “Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell
you something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will
make even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and
dance and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, as
I have begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young and strong as
when we got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses were the
leaders, but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so.
When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath
our armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood
that grew about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind
blowing; the snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields
were coated thick with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts,
and slept comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders,
but I had carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that I
should be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and
shield. When the night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted
their places, I nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and
he at once gave me his ear.

“‘Ulysses,’ said I, ‘this cold will be the death of me, for I have no
cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my
shirt, and I do not know what to do.’

“Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following
plan:

“‘Keep still,’ said he in a low voice, ‘or the others will hear you.’
Then he raised his head on his elbow.

“‘My friends,’ said he, ‘I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. We
are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell
Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.’

“On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in
those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak
both out of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; but
now people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby.”

And Eumaeus answered, “Old man, you have told us an excellent story,
and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow
morning you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for
we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has
only one. When Ulysses’ son comes home again he will give you both
cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go.”

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some
goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here
Ulysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak
that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the
swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready to
go outside, and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his
property during his master’s absence. First he slung his sword over his
brawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also
took the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of
attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the
pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
the North wind.




BOOK XV


MINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON—HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUS
AT PYLOS AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA—ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF
EUMAEUS.


But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses’ son
that he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping
in the forecourt of Menelaus’s house; Pisistratus was fast asleep, but
Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
father, so Minerva went close up to him and said:

“Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer,
nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they
will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a
fool’s errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to
find your excellent mother still there when you get back. Her father
and brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has given
her more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his
wedding presents. I hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the
house in spite of you, but you know what women are—they always want to
do the best they can for the man who marries them, and never give
another thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their
father either when he is dead and done with. Go home, therefore, and
put everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you
have, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Let
me tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. The
chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait128
between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kill you before you can
reach home. I do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely
that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a
grave themselves. Sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from
the islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send
you a fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men on
to the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge
of your pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him,
therefore, for the night, and then send him to Penelope to tell her
that you have got back safe from Pylos.”

Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with
his heel to rouse him, and said, “Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the
horses to the chariot, for we must set off home.”129

But Pisistratus said, “No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
in the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought
his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good
bye to us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should never
forget a host who has shown him kindness.”

As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,
leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he put
on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his
shoulders, and went out to meet him. “Menelaus,” said he, “let me go
back now to my own country, for I want to get home.”

And Menelaus answered, “Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not
detain you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or
too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a
man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he
would like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he is in
the house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then, till I
can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have
yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient
dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once
more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out
on such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a
tour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will
conduct you myself through all our principal cities. No one will send
us away empty handed; every one will give us something—a bronze tripod,
a couple of mules, or a gold cup.”

“Menelaus,” replied Telemachus, “I want to go home at once, for when I
came away I left my property without protection, and fear that while
looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that
something valuable has been stolen during my absence.”

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to
prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At
this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got
up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he
at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room,130
not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When he reached the
place where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a double
cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing bowl.
Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses
which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was
largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered
like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. 131 Then they all
came back through the house again till they got to Telemachus, and
Menelaus said, “Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring
you safely home according to your desire. I will now present you with
the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a
mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold,
and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me a
present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on
my return home. I should like to give it to you.”

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,
while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before
him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.

“I too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as a keepsake from
the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go
back rejoicing to your own country and to your home.”

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. Then
Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as
he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the
house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought
them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver
basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside
them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good
things of what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved the meat and
gave them each their portions, while Megapenthes poured out the wine.
Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them,
but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus and
Pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot.
They drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing
gatehouse of the outer court, and Menelaus came after them with a
golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they might make a
drink-offering before they set out. He stood in front of the horses and
pledged them, saying, “Farewell to both of you; see that you tell
Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind to me as any father
could be while we Achaeans were fighting before Troy.”

“We will be sure, sir,” answered Telemachus, “to tell him everything as
soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses
returned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very
great kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents I
am taking with me.”

As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with a
great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm
yard—and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. It
came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front
of the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took
comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, “Tell me, Menelaus, has
heaven sent this omen for us or for you?”

Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to
make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, “I will read this
matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it
will come to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred
and has its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled
far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge—if indeed he is
not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors.”

“May Jove so grant it,” replied Telemachus, “if it should prove to be
so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am at
home.”

As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
through the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon
their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles
lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passed
the night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashed
his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came
to Pylos, and then Telemachus said:

“Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you.
You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both
of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely;
do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I
go to your father’s house he will try to keep me in the warmth of his
good will towards me, and I must go home at once.”

Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he
deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus’s
beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Then
he said, “Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before I
can reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he is, and am
sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to fetch you, and
he will not go back without you. But he will be very angry.”

With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians
and soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and
gave his orders. “Now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order on
board the ship, and let us set out home.”

Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But as
Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva in
the ship’s stern, there came to him a man from a distant country, a
seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He was
descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep;
he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into exile by
the great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods and held
them for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner in the
house of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of
the daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great sorrow
that dread Erinys had laid upon him. In the end, however, he escaped
with his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged the
wrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his
brother. Then he left the country and went to Argos, where it was
ordained that he should reign over much people. There he married,
established himself, and had two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius.
Antiphates became father of Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who was
dearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, but he did not live to old
age, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of a woman’s gifts. His sons
were Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of Melampus, was
father to Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in gold, carried off
Cleitus for his beauty’s sake, that he might dwell among the immortals,
but Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now
that Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with his father and went to
live in Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men.

His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was
making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. “Friend,” said he, “now
that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by your
sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray you
also by your own head and by those of your followers tell me the truth
and nothing but the truth. Who and whence are you? Tell me also of your
town and parents.”

Telemachus said, “I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, and
my father is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has come
to some miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew
together to see if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a
long time.”

“I too,” answered Theoclymenus, “am an exile, for I have killed a man
of my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they
have great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at
their hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the
earth. I am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that
they may not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit.”

“I will not refuse you,” replied Telemachus, “if you wish to join us.
Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according
to what we have.”

On this he received Theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck of
the ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus
sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them
to catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They set
the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast
with the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of
twisted ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew fresh and
strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible. Thus then
they passed by Crouni and Chalcis.

Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel
made a quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans
rule. Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands,132 wondering
within himself whether he should escape death or should be taken
prisoner.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the
hut, and the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat and
drink, Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he
would continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the
station or pack him off to the city; so he said:

“Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging
about the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Give
me your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me
and show me the way. I will go the round of the city begging as I needs
must, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece of bread. I
should like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring news of her
husband to Queen Penelope. I could then go about among the suitors and
see if out of all their abundance they will give me a dinner. I should
soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. Listen and
believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives grace
and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who would
make a more handy servant than I should—to put fresh wood on the fire,
chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that
poor men have to do for their betters.”

The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. “Heaven help
me,” he exclaimed, “what ever can have put such a notion as that into
your head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a
certainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. They
would never think of taking a man like you for a servant. Their
servants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and
shirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables
are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Stay
where you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; I do not mind your
being here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes
home he will give you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you
want to go.”

Ulysses answered, “I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to
me, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble;
there is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men
have once got low down in the world they will go through a great deal
on behalf of their miserable bellies. Since, however, you press me to
stay here and await the return of Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses’
mother, and his father whom he left on the threshold of old age when he
set out for Troy. Are they still living or are they already dead and in
the house of Hades?”

“I will tell you all about them,” replied Eumaeus, “Laertes is still
living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,
for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also
about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him
more than anything else did. She came to an unhappy end133 through
sorrow for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by
me come to such an end as she did. As long as she was still living,
though she was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and asking
her how she did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene,
the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she
made little difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, they
sent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me,
my mistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for
my feet, and sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of
me as ever. This is all over now. Still it has pleased heaven to
prosper my work in the situation which I now hold. I have enough to eat
and drink, and can find something for any respectable stranger who
comes here; but there is no getting a kind word or deed out of my
mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked people.
Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk with her;
they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and
something too to take back with them into the country. This is what
will keep servants in a good humour.”

Ulysses answered, “Then you must have been a very little fellow,
Eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.
Tell me, and tell me true, was the city in which your father and mother
lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you
were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for
whatever your master gave them?”

“Stranger,” replied Eumaeus, “as regards your question: sit still, make
yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nights are
now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and
sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time,
too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes
to go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can then take my master’s
pigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning. We too will sit
here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories
about our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and been
buffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memory
of sorrows that have long gone by. As regards your question, then, my
tale is as follows:

“You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above
Ortygia,134 where the land begins to turn round and look in another
direction.135 It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good,
with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine
and wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any
sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them
with his painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the whole
country is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus,
a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.

“Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (for
the Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted
with gewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman in
my father’s house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant;
these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near
their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman can
resist, no matter how good she may be by nature. The man who had
seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on this
she told him her father’s name. ‘I come from Sidon,’ said she, ‘and am
daughter to Arybas, a man rolling in wealth. One day as I was coming
into the town from the country, some Taphian pirates seized me and took
me here over the sea, where they sold me to the man who owns this
house, and he gave them their price for me.’

“The man who had seduced her then said, ‘Would you like to come along
with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
They are both alive and are said to be well off.’

“‘I will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men will first swear me a
solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.’

“They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their
oath the woman said, ‘Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the
street or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one
should go and tell my master, in which case he would suspect something.
He would put me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep
your own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can,
and send me word when you have done loading. I will bring as much gold
as I can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that I can
do towards paying my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good man of the
house, a funny little fellow just able to run about. I will carry him
off in your ship, and you will get a great deal of money for him if you
take him and sell him in foreign parts.’

“On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole
year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,
and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the
woman. Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father’s
house bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and
while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and
bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and then went
back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led me out of the
house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with the
cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in
attendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public
assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the
bosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew no better. The sun
was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as
fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the Phoenician ship
was lying. When they had got on board they sailed their ways over the
sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind; six days did
we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck the
woman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as though she were
a sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the
seals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently the
winds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of
his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon
this country.”

Ulysses answered, “Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes
with the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as
well as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, who
sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good
life, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city to city.”

Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for
sleep, for it was soon daybreak. In the mean time Telemachus and his
crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast,
and rowed the ship into the harbour.136 They cast out their mooring
stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore,
mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had had enough
to eat and drink Telemachus said, “Take the ship on to the town, but
leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my
farms. In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to
the city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give
you all a good dinner with meat and wine.” 137

Then Theoclymenus said, “And what, my dear young friend, is to become
of me? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or
shall I go straight to your own house and to your mother?”

“At any other time,” replied Telemachus, “I should have bidden you go
to my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at the
present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for I
shall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show
herself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper
chamber, out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose house you can
go to—I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held in the highest
estimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much the best man and the most
persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and
trying to take Ulysses’ place. Jove, however, in heaven alone knows
whether or no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takes
place.”

As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk, Apollo’s
messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore
them off,138 fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the ship.
On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
“Telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not fly on your right hand
without having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw it I knew
it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there
will be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own.”

“I wish it may prove so,” answered Telemachus. “If it does, I will show
you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet
you will congratulate you.”

Then he said to his friend Piraeus, “Piraeus, son of Clytius, you have
throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who
have accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to
your own house and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him.”

And Piraeus answered, “Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you
please, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack of
hospitality.”

As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose
the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus
bound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head of
sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. Then they loosed the
hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city as
they had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as he
could, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds of swine
were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so
devoted a servant to his master.




BOOK XVI


ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.


Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were
were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out
with the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but
fawned upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing
that the dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus:

“Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of
your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and
not barking.”

The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the
door. Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing
wine fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his
head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not
be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old
age, after ten years’ absence in a foreign country and after having
gone through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as
though he had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:

“So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I
heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you
any more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good
look at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into
the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town
generally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the
suitors are doing.”

“So be it, old friend,” answered Telemachus, “but I am come now because
I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her old
home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of
Ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs.”

“She is still at the house,” replied Eumaeus, “grieving and breaking
her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually.”

As he spoke he took Telemachus’ spear, whereon he crossed the stone
threshold and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place
as he entered, but Telemachus checked him; “Sit down, stranger,” said
he, “I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay
it for me.”

Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green
brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for
Telemachus to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters of
cold meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he
filled the bread baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed wine
also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses. Then they
laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon
as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus,
“Old friend, where does this stranger come from? How did his crew bring
him to Ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly he did not come here by
land.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “My son, I will tell you the
real truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great
traveller. At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship,
and has taken refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands.
Do whatever you like with him, only remember that he is your
suppliant.”

“I am very much distressed,” said Telemachus, “by what you have just
told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young,
and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My
mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look
after the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her
husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man
of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most
advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station I
will find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals,
and will send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keep
him here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food that he
may be no burden on you and on your men; but I will not have him go
near the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat
him in a way that would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man
may be he can do nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong
for him.”

Then Ulysses said, “Sir, it is right that I should say something
myself. I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent
way in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you
are. Tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god
set your people against you? May you not complain of your brothers—for
it is to these that a man may look for support, however great his
quarrel may be? I wish I were as young as you are and in my present
mind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I would
rather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go to the house
and be the bane of every one of these men.139 If they were too many for
me—I being single-handed—I would rather die fighting in my own house
than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly
maltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an
unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose
for an end that shall never be accomplished.”

And Telemachus answered, “I will tell you truly everything. There is no
enmity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to
whom a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jove
has made us a race of only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius,
and Ulysses only son of Laertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysses
who left me behind him when he went away, so that I have never been of
any use to him. Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of
numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands,
Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca
itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my
mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor
yet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and
before long will do so with myself into the bargain. The issue,
however, rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once
and tell Penelope that I am safe and have returned from Pylos. Tell it
to herself alone, and then come back here without letting any one else
know, for there are many who are plotting mischief against me.”

“I understand and heed you,” replied Eumaeus; “you need instruct me no
further, only as I am going that way say whether I had not better let
poor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend the
work on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he
would eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me
that from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither eaten
nor drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sits
weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones.”

“More’s the pity,” answered Telemachus, “I am sorry for him, but we
must leave him to himself just now. If people could have everything
their own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return of
my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again,
and do not turn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother to send
one of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it
from her.”

Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals,
bound them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched him
well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a
woman—fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the entry,
and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see her, and
knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen
by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not
bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.
She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon
he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the
yards. Then she said to him:

“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your
son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the
destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be
long in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray.”

As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw a
fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him
younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour,
filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then she
went away and Ulysses came back inside the hut. His son was astounded
when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking
upon a god.

“Stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from what you were
a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour is not
the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? If
so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings
of wrought gold. Have mercy upon me.”

And Ulysses said, “I am no god, why should you take me for one? I am
your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the
hands of lawless men.”

As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the
ground, for he had restrained all tears till now. But Telemachus could
not yet believe that it was his father, and said:

“You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes
that I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself
contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young
at a moment’s notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you were
old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from
heaven.”

Ulysses answered, “Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably
astonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who will
come hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and
much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country.
What you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, who
does with me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. At one
moment she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man with
good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in
heaven to make any man look either rich or poor.”

As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father
and wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like
eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their
half fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the
sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had not
suddenly said, “In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you
to Ithaca? Of what nation did they declare themselves to be—for you
cannot have come by land?”

“I will tell you the truth, my son,” replied Ulysses. “It was the
Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in the
habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took
me over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after
giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These things by
heaven’s mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here on
the suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing our
enemies. First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with their
number, that I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can then turn
the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole
body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us.”

To this Telemachus answered, “Father, I have always heard of your
renown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a
very great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot
stand against many and brave ones. There are not ten suitors only, nor
twice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at
once. There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium, and they have
six servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeans
from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well born.
They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve
at table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to
rue your coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of some
one who would be willing to come and help us.”

“Listen to me,” replied Ulysses, “and think whether Minerva and her
father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some
one else as well.”

“Those whom you have named,” answered Telemachus, “are a couple of good
allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power
over both gods and men.”

“These two,” continued Ulysses, “will not keep long out of the fray,
when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, return
home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.
Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a
miserable old beggar. If you see them ill treating me, steel your heart
against my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of
the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently
trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to
you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and
lay my saying to your heart; when Minerva shall put it in my mind, I
will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect all
the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.
Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say
that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as
it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become
soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you
are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that
they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and
wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. But
leave a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple of
oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove and
Minerva will then soon quiet these people. There is also another
matter; if you are indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, let
no one know that Ulysses is within the house—neither Laertes, nor yet
the swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even Penelope herself. Let
you and me exploit the women alone, and let us also make trial of some
other of the men servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is
against us.”

“Father,” replied Telemachus, “you will come to know me by and by, and
when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not think,
however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us.
Think it over. It will take us a long time to go the round of the farms
and exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your
estate with impunity and without compunction. Prove the women by all
means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but I am not in
favour of going round and trying the men. We can attend to that later
on, if you really have some sign from Jove that he will support you.”

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought
Telemachus and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When
they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land;
their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all
the presents at the house of Clytius. Then they sent a servant to tell
Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the
ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the
same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, the
servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting
women, “Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos”; but Eumaeus went
close up to Penelope, and said privately all that her son had bidden
him tell her. When he had given his message he left the house with its
outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.

The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went
outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a
council near the main entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the
first to speak.

“My friends,” said he, “this voyage of Telemachus’s is a very serious
matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however,
let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to send
after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can.”

He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and saw
the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and
putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, “We need
not send them any message, for they are here. Some god must have told
them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her.”

On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the
ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they
went up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any
one old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes,
spoke first.

“Good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved this man from
destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all day
long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but
waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and
killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let us
consider how we can make an end of him. He must not escape us; our
affair is never likely to come off while he is alive, for he is very
shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side. We must make
haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he will lose no time
in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell all the
world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The people
will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they
do us no hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us try
and lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the
road hither. Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his
mother and the man who marries her have the house. If this does not
please you, and you wish Telemachus to live on and hold his father’s
property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this
way, but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own house, and
she can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it
is to win her.”

They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the
son of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among
all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of
Dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope
than that of any of the other suitors, for he was a man of good natural
disposition. “My friends,” said he, speaking to them plainly and in all
honestly, “I am not in favour of killing Telemachus. It is a heinous
thing to kill one who is of noble blood. Let us first take counsel of
the gods, and if the oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to
kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they
dissuade us, I would have you hold your hands.”

Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose
forthwith and went to the house of Ulysses, where they took their
accustomed seats.

Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. She
knew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had
overheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to
the court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister
holding a veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying:

“Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best
speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are
nothing of the kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death of
Telemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jove
himself? It is not right for you to plot thus against one another. Do
you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the
people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some Taphian
pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us? They
wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulysses
stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour
his property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his
wife and trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop the
others also.”

To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, “Take heart, Queen Penelope
daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon
your son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the
earth. I say—and it shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddened
with his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees, held
wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing
to fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death comes to him
from the gods, he cannot escape it.” He said this to quiet her, but in
reality he was plotting against Telemachus.

Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva
shed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses
and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were
helping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to
Ulysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and clad
him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might
recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.

Telemachus was the first to speak. “So you have got back, Eumaeus,”
said he. “What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, or
are they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?”

“I did not think of asking about that,” replied Eumaeus, “when I was in
the town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as I
could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and he
was the first to tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I saw
with my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury
above the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number of
men in her. They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was the
suitors, but I cannot be sure.”

On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus
could not see him.

Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they
ate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As
soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest
and enjoyed the boon of sleep.




BOOK XVII


TELEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHER MEET—ULYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THE
TOWN, AND ULYSSES IS INSULTED BY MELANTHIUS—HE IS RECOGNISED BY THE DOG
ARGOS—HE IS INSULTED AND PRESENTLY STRUCK BY ANTINOUS WITH A
STOOL—PENELOPE DESIRES THAT HE SHALL BE SENT TO HER.


When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus
bound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, for
he wanted to go into the city. “Old friend,” said he to the swineherd,
“I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will
never leave off grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunate
stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who
will give him a drink and a piece of bread. I have trouble enough of my
own, and cannot be burdened with other people. If this makes him angry
so much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean.”

Then Ulysses said, “Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can
always do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give
him something. I am too old to care about remaining here at the beck
and call of a master. Therefore let this man do as you have just told
him, and take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire,
and the day has got a little heat in it. My clothes are wretchedly
thin, and this frosty morning I shall be perished with cold, for you
say the city is some way off.”

On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge
upon the suitors. When he reached home he stood his spear against a
bearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister
itself, and went inside.

Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was putting
the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to
him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and
shoulders with their kisses. Penelope came out of her room looking like
Diana or Venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son. She
kissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, “Light of my eyes,”
she cried as she spoke fondly to him, “so you are come home again; I
made sure I was never going to see you any more. To think of your
having gone off to Pylos without saying anything about it or obtaining
my consent. But come, tell me what you saw.”

“Do not scold me, mother,” answered Telemachus, “nor vex me, seeing
what a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress,
go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs
to all the gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the
suitors. I must now go to the place of assembly to invite a stranger
who has come back with me from Pylos. I sent him on with my crew, and
told Piraeus to take him home and look after him till I could come for
him myself.”

She heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, and
vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only
vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors.

Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—not
alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him with a
presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went
by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths
and malice in their hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with
Mentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses, old friends of his father’s house,
and they made him tell them all that had happened to him. Then Piraeus
came up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted through the town to the
place of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once joined them. Piraeus was
first to speak: “Telemachus,” said he, “I wish you would send some of
your women to my house to take away the presents Menelaus gave you.”

“We do not know, Piraeus,” answered Telemachus, “what may happen. If
the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among them,
I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people
should get hold of them. If on the other hand I managed to kill them, I
shall be much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents.”

With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they got
there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the
baths, and washed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointed
them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at
table. A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden
ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands;
and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them
bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one of the
bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their hands
on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink Penelope said:

“Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which
I have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set out
for Troy with the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clear
to me before the suitors came back to the house, whether or no you had
been able to hear anything about the return of your father.”

“I will tell you then truth,” replied her son. “We went to Pylos and
saw Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably as
though I were a son of his own who had just returned after a long
absence; so also did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word from
any human being about Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead. He sent
me, therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaus. There I saw
Helen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were in
heaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelaus asked me what it was that
had brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth, whereon
he said, ‘So, then, these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hind
might as well lay her new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then go
off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell. The lion, when he
comes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair of them, and
so will Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and
Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled with
Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Greeks
cheered him—if he is still such, and were to come near these suitors,
they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your
question, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the
old man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full. He said he
could see Ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the
nymph Calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his
home, for he had no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ This
was what Menelaus told me, and when I had heard his story I came away;
the gods then gave me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again.”

With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus said
to her:

“Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things;
listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide
nothing from you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the
rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come,
that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about the
country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds
and preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen when I
was on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about it.”

“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true, you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you
shall congratulate you.”

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or
aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the
house, and behaving with all their old insolence. But when it was now
time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the
town from all the country round, 140 with their shepherds as usual,
then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them
at table, said, “Now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport,
so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing,
at dinner time.”

They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the
house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then
sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and
well grown.141 Thus they made ready for their meal. In the meantime
Ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the
swineherd said, “Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to town
to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I should have
liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my master
tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one’s
master is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is now broad
day; it will be night again directly and then you will find it
colder.”142

“I know, and understand you,” replied Ulysses; “you need say no more.
Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it to
walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one.”

As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders,
by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his
liking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs
and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his
master followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as he
leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When they had
got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached
the fountain from which the citizens drew their water. This had been
made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a grove of
water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clear
cold water came down to it from a rock high up,143 while above the
fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used
to sacrifice. Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was
driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors’
dinner, and there were two shepherds with him. When he saw Eumaeus and
Ulysses he reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, which
made Ulysses very angry.

“There you go,” cried he, “and a precious pair you are. See how heaven
brings birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, master
swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would make any
one sick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never won
a prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his
shoulders against every man’s door post, and begging, not for swords
and cauldrons144 like a man, but only for a few scraps not worth
begging for. If you would give him to me for a hand on my station, he
might do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to the
kids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; but
he has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he
will do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his
insatiable belly. I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he goes
near Ulysses’ house he will get his head broken by the stools they will
fling at him, till they turn him out.”

On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of pure
wantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path.
For a moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill him
with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he
resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the
swineherd looked straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his
hands and praying to heaven as he did so.

“Fountain nymphs,” he cried, “children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burned
you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my
prayer that heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to the
swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting
people—gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin
through bad shepherding.”

Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, “You ill conditioned cur, what
are you talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board ship
and take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket the
money you will fetch. I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike
Telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as I
am that Ulysses will never come home again.”

With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went
quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. When he got
there he went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite
Eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. The servants
brought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread
before him that he might eat. Presently Ulysses and the swineherd came
up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemius was
just beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took hold of the
swineherd’s hand, and said:

“Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how far
you go, you will find few like it. One building keeps following on
after another. The outer court has a wall with battlements all round
it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be
a hard matter to take it by force of arms. I perceive, too, that there
are many people banqueting within it, for there is a smell of roast
meat, and I hear a sound of music, which the gods have made to go along
with feasting.”

Then Eumaeus said, “You have perceived aright, as indeed you generally
do; but let us think what will be our best course. Will you go inside
first and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you
wait here and let me go in first? But do not wait long, or some one may
see you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. Consider
this matter I pray you.”

And Ulysses answered, “I understand and heed. Go in first and leave me
here where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having things
thrown at me. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea that
I am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a man cannot
hide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives
much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted
out to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people.”

As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised his
head and pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bred
before setting out for Troy, but he had never had any work out of him.
In the old days he used to be taken out by the young men when they went
hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone
he was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in
front of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away to
manure the great close; and he was full of fleas. As soon as he saw
Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but he
could not get close up to his master. When Ulysses saw the dog on the
other side of the yard, he dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeus
seeing it, and said:

“Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap:
his build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he
only one of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept
merely for show?”

“This hound,” answered Eumaeus, “belonged to him who has died in a far
country. If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he would
soon show you what he could do. There was not a wild beast in the
forest that could get away from him when he was once on its tracks. But
now he has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and
the women take no care of him. Servants never do their work when their
master’s hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes half the goodness
out of a man when he makes a slave of him.”

As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the
suitors were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognised his master.

Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him
to come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lying
near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he
picked it up, brought it to Telemachus’s table, and sat down opposite
him. Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from
the bread-basket.

Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor
miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in
rags. He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors
leading from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-post
of cypress-wood which the carpenter had skilfully planed, and had made
to join truly with rule and line. Telemachus took a whole loaf from the
bread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, and
said to Eumaeus, “Take this to the stranger, and tell him to go the
round of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not be
shamefaced.”

So Eumaeus went up to him and said, “Stranger, Telemachus sends you
this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for
beggars must not be shamefaced.”

Ulysses answered, “May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, and
fulfil the desire of his heart.”

Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid it
on the dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while the
bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he left off. The
suitors applauded the bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses and
prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that
he might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the
bad; but come what might she was not going to save a single one of
them. Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right,
and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real beggar.
Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another
who he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthius
said, “Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something about
him, for I have seen him before. The swineherd brought him here, but I
know nothing about the man himself, nor where he comes from.”

On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. “You precious idiot,” he
cried, “what have you brought this man to town for? Have we not tramps
and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? Do you think
it a small thing that such people gather here to waste your master’s
property—and must you needs bring this man as well?”

And Eumaeus answered, “Antinous, your birth is good but your words
evil. It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely to
invite a stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those who
can do public service as a seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a
bard who can charm us with his singing? Such men are welcome all the
world over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar who will only worry
him. You are always harder on Ulysses’ servants than any of the other
suitors are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as
Telemachus and Penelope are alive and here.”

But Telemachus said, “Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the
bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse.”

Then turning to Antinous he said, “Antinous, you take as much care of
my interests as though I were your son. Why should you want to see this
stranger turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take something and
give it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never mind
my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I know you
will not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself
than of giving them to other people.”

“What do you mean, Telemachus,” replied Antinous, “by this swaggering
talk? If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he would
not come here again for another three months.”

As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from
under the table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, but
the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet with
bread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold
and eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up to
Antinous and said:

“Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you
seem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be
the better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty. I too
was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days I
gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor
what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other things
which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it
pleased Jove to take all away from me. He sent me with a band of roving
robbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone by it. I
stationed my ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them
and keep guard over them, while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from
every point of vantage.

“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and
ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their
wives and children captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city,
and when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till
the plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam
of armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no
longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The
Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced
labour for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met them,
to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man in
Cyprus. Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery.”

Then Antinous said, “What god can have sent such a pestilence to plague
us during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court,145 or I
will give you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and
importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given you
lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be free
with other people’s property when there is plenty of it.”

On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, “Your looks, my fine sir,
are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would
not spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are in
another man’s, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you
to give him even a piece of bread.”

This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, “You shall
pay for this before you get clear of the court.” With these words he
threw a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near
the top of his back. Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did not
even stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded on his
revenge. Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying
his well filled wallet at his feet.

“Listen to me,” he cried, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may
speak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if he gets
hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and
even so Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly,
which is always getting people into trouble. Still, if the poor have
gods and avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinous may come to
a bad end before his marriage.”

“Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off
elsewhere,” shouted Antinous. “If you say more I will have you dragged
hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you
alive.”

The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young
men said, “Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a
tramp: it will be worse for you if he should turn out to be some
god—and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as
people from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do
amiss and who righteously.”146

Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. Meanwhile
Telemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to his
father, and though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silence
and brooded on his revenge.

Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the
banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “Would that Apollo
would so strike you, Antinous,” and her waiting woman Eurynome
answered, “If our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would
ever again see the sun rise.” Then Penelope said, “Nurse,147 I hate
every single one of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but I
hate Antinous like the darkness of death itself. A poor unfortunate
tramp has come begging about the house for sheer want. Every one else
has given him something to put in his wallet, but Antinous has hit him
on the right shoulder-blade with a footstool.”

Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in the
meantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for the
swineherd and said, “Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, I
want to see him and ask him some questions. He seems to have travelled
much, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “If these Achaeans, Madam,
would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his
adventures. I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut,
which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship,
and he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. If he had
been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips
all hearers hang entranced, I could not have been more charmed as I sat
in my hut and listened to him. He says there is an old friendship
between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Crete
where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither
and thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has
heard of Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the
Thesprotians, and that he is bringing great wealth home with him.”

“Call him here, then,” said Penelope, “that I too may hear his story.
As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they
will, for they have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine remain
unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while
they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen,
sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a
thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand such
recklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect us. If he were to
come again, he and his son would soon have their revenge.”

As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house
resounded with it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to
Eumaeus, “Go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed
just as I was speaking? This can only mean that all the suitors are
going to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape. Furthermore
I say, and lay my saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that the
stranger is speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and cloak of
good wear.”

When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, “Father
stranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you;
she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her
about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the
truth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very things
that you are most in want of. As for bread, you can get enough of that
to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those give
that will.”

“I will tell Penelope,” answered Ulysses, “nothing but what is strictly
true. I know all about her husband, and have been partner with him in
affliction, but I am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel
suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. Just now,
moreover, as I was going about the house without doing any harm, a man
gave me a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemachus nor any
one else defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait
till sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for my
clothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for you have seen them
ever since I first asked you to help me—she can then ask me about the
return of her husband.”

The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she
saw him cross the threshold, “Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus?
Is he afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming
inside the house at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “The stranger is quite
reasonable. He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one
else would do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much
better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can
hear him and talk to him as you will.”

“The man is no fool,” answered Penelope, “it would very likely be as he
says, for there are no such abominable people in the whole world as
these men are.”

When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he had
explained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his ear
so that none could overhear him, “My dear sir, I will now go back to
the pigs, to see after your property and my own business. You will look
to what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of
danger, for there are many who bear you ill will. May Jove bring them
to a bad end before they do us a mischief.”

“Very well,” replied Telemachus, “go home when you have had your
dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are to
sacrifice for the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me.”

On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his
dinner he left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and
went back to his pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began to
amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on
towards evening.




BOOK XVIII


THE FIGHT WITH IRUS—ULYSSES WARNS AMPHINOMUS—PENELOPE GETS PRESENTS
FROM THE SUITORS—THE BRAZIERS—ULYSSES REBUKES EURYMACHUS.


Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all over
the city of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and
drunkard. This man had no strength nor stay in him, but he was a great
hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him,
was Arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him Irus,148 because
he used to run errands for any one who would send him. As soon as he
came he began to insult Ulysses, and to try and drive him out of his
own house.

“Be off, old man,” he cried, “from the doorway, or you shall be dragged
out neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me the
wink, and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to do
so? Get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.”

Ulysses frowned on him and said, “My friend, I do you no manner of
harm; people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is room
enough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me
things that are not yours to give. You seem to be just such another
tramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by and
by. Do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will incense
me, and old though I am, I shall cover your mouth and chest with blood.
I shall have more peace tomorrow if I do, for you will not come to the
house of Ulysses any more.”

Irus was very angry and answered, “You filthy glutton, you run on
trippingly like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both hands
about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar’s
tusks. Get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and
look on. You will never be able to fight one who is so much younger
than yourself.”

Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front
of the doorway,149 and when Antinous saw what was going on he laughed
heartily and said to the others, “This is the finest sport that you
ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house. The
stranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us set
them on to do so at once.”

The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged
tramps. “Listen to me,” said Antinous, “there are some goats’ paunches
down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set
aside for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be the
better man shall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of our
table and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all.”

The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,
“Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his
own against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, though
I know it can only end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear,
however that none of you will give me a foul blow to favour Irus and
secure him the victory.”

They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath
Telemachus put in a word and said, “Stranger, if you have a mind to
settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here.
Whoever strikes you will have to fight more than one. I am host, and
the other chiefs, Antinous and Eurymachus, both of them men of
understanding, are of the same mind as I am.”

Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins,
thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his
mighty arms; but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even
stronger still. The suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one
would turn towards his neighbour saying, “The stranger has brought such
a thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left of
Irus.”

Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded
him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such
a fright that his limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded him and
said, “You swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all
if you are afraid of such an old broken down creature as this tramp is.
I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he beats you and proves
himself the better man, I shall pack you off on board ship to the
mainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes
near him. He will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your
entrails for the dogs to eat.”

This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle
of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulysses
considered whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an end
of him then and there, or whether he should give him a lighter blow
that should only knock him down; in the end he deemed it best to give
the lighter blow for fear the Achaeans should begin to suspect who he
was. Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the right
shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the ear that
broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his
mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on
the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of
laughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him
into the outer court as far as the gate-house. There he propped him up
against the wall and put his staff in his hands. “Sit here,” said he,
“and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you
try to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still
worse.”

Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his
shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon
the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and
saluting him, “May Jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant you
whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this
insatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, to
king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.”

Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat’s
paunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves
out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he did
so in a golden goblet of wine. “Good luck to you,” he said, “father
stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have
better times by and by.”

To this Ulysses answered, “Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good
understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I
have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man
both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to
be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am
saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon
earth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks
that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods
bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the best
of it; for God almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. I know
all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in the
stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my
brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things
always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
vain glory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see
how they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of
one who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence.
Nay, he will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that
you may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is here
the suitors and he will not part bloodlessly.”

With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put
the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away
serious and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did
not escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand
of Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which he had
come.

Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the
suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win
still further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking
laugh and said, “Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to
show myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should like also
to give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to do
with them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief.”

“My dear child,” answered Eurynome, “all that you have said is true, go
and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your
face. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is
not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom
you always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is already
grown up.”

“I know, Eurynome,” replied Penelope, “that you mean well, but do not
try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me
of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I am
in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be
proper for me to do so.”

On this the old woman150 went out of the room to bid the maids go to
their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another
matter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on
her couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed
grace and beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She
washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she
goes dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a more
commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn
ivory. When Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids
came in from the women’s room and woke Penelope with the sound of their
talking.

“What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having,” said she, as
she passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. I wish
Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I might
no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who
possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man
among the Achaeans.”

With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either
side of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might
win her for his own bed fellow.

“Telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “I fear you are no longer
so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger
you had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown
up, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a
well to do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by
no means what it should be. What is all this disturbance that has been
going on, and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully
ill-treated? What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury
while a suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been very
discreditable to you.”

“I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” replied
Telemachus, “I understand all about it and know when things are not as
they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot,
however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and then
another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind,
and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fight
between Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it
to do, for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers
of yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all
be as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. See
how he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing
that he cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever
that may be, for he has no strength left in him.”

Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, “Queen
Penelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos
could see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your
house by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the
whole world both as regards personal beauty and strength of
understanding.”

To this Penelope replied, “Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my
beauty whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and
my dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my
affairs, I should both be more respected and show a better presence to
the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all,
and when he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand—‘Wife,’
he said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the
Trojans fight well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also at
fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight sooner
than this. I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back to
you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime do
you look after things here. Take care of my father and mother as at
present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our son
growing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your present
home.’ This is what he said and now it is all coming true. A night will
come when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest,
for Jove has taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief,
moreover, cuts me to the very heart. You suitors are not wooing me
after the custom of my country. When men are courting a woman who they
think will be a good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when
they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen
and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her
magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people’s property
without paying for it.”

This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying
to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words
which he knew she did not mean.

Then Antinous said, “Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as many
presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is
not well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business nor
stir from where we are, till you have married the best man among us
whoever he may be.”

The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his
servant to bring his present. Antinous’s man returned with a large and
lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully
made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus
immediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beads
that gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas’s two men returned with some
earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most
beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace of
the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful
present of some kind.

Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought
the presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and
dancing, and stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it
grew dark; they then brought in three braziers151 to give light, and
piled them up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit
torches from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. Then
Ulysses said:

“Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the
queen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick
wool. I will hold the light for all these people. They may stay till
morning, but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal.”

The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho
began to gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but
had been brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play
with, and looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of all
this she showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and
used to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was in love.

“Poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of your mind? Go and
sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering
here. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters—so
many of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, or do you
always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you
beat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not come
and cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of the
house.”

“Vixen,” replied Ulysses, scowling at her, “I will go and tell
Telemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb
from limb.”

With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body
of the house. They trembled all over, for they thought he would do as
he said. But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding
up torches and looking at the people—brooding the while on things that
should surely come to pass.

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their
insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against
them; she therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him,
which made the others laugh. “Listen to me,” said he, “you suitors of
Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. It is not for
nothing that this man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe the
light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head—for
his hair is all gone, every bit of it.”

Then turning to Ulysses he said, “Stranger, will you work as a servant,
if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you
build a stone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year
round, and will find you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Not
you; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had
rather fill your belly by going round the country begging.”

“Eurymachus,” answered Ulysses, “if you and I were to work one against
the other in early summer when the days are at their longest—give me a
good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will last
the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing
grass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us each take a
yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance:
turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive the
straighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out this day, give me a
shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon my
temples—you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease your
gibes about my belly. You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself a
great man because you live in a little world, and that a bad one. If
Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but
you will find them narrow when you try to fly through them.”

Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, “You
wretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me,
and in public too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do you
always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you
beat the tramp Irus.” With this he caught hold of a footstool, but
Ulysses sought protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, for
he was afraid. The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and
knocked him down: the man fell with a cry flat on his back, and his
wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. The suitors in the covered
cloister were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his
neighbour, saying, “I wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad
luck to him, for all the trouble he gives us. We cannot permit such
disturbance about a beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we
shall have no more pleasure at our banquet.”

On this Telemachus came forward and said, “Sirs, are you mad? Can you
not carry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit has
possessed you. I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had
your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better.”

The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, “Do not
let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer.
Neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses’
servants. Let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we
may make them and go home to our rest. As for the stranger, let us
leave Telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that he has
come.”

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of
Dulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water
and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their
drink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made their
drink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they took
their several ways each of them to his own abode.




BOOK XIX


TELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR—ULYSSES INTERVIEWS
PENELOPE—EURYCLEA WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HIS
LEG—PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO ULYSSES.


Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with
Minerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he said
to Telemachus, “Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it
down inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have
removed it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the
smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away,
but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more
particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over
their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may
disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes
tempts people to use them.”

Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse
Euryclea and said, “Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I
take the armour that my father left behind him down into the store
room. No one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all
smirched with soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down where
the smoke cannot reach it.”

“I wish, child,” answered Euryclea, “that you would take the management
of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the
property yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the
store-room? The maids would have done so, but you would not let them.”

“The stranger,” said Telemachus, “shall show me a light; when people
eat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from.”

Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields,
and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her
hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said,
“Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,
crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with a
flaming fire. Surely there is some god here who has come down from
heaven.”

“Hush,” answered Ulysses, “hold your peace and ask no questions, for
this is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me here
to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief will
ask me all sorts of questions.”

On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner
court, to the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed
till morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the
means whereby with Minerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors.

Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and
they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the
fire in her accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had a
footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered
with a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the
women’s room to join her. They set about removing the tables at which
the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was
left, with the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied the embers
out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light
and heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said,
“Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all
night and spying upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat
your supper there, or you shall be driven out with a firebrand.”

Ulysses scowled at her and answered, “My good woman, why should you be
so angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all
in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner
of tramps and beggars generally? I too was a rich man once, and had a
fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I
now am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number
of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well
and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from
me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and
place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest you
get out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should come
home, for there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, though
he be dead as you think he is, yet by Apollo’s will he has left a son
behind him, Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids
in the house, for he is now no longer in his boyhood.”

Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, “Impudent
baggage,” said she, “I see how abominably you are behaving, and you
shall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself,
that I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for
whose sake I am in such continual sorrow.”

Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, “Bring a seat with a
fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story,
and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions.”

Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon
as Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, “Stranger, I shall
first ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town and
parents.”

“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “who on the face of the whole earth can dare
to chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself;
you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the
monarch over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and
barley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs,
and the sea abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people
do good deeds under him. Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, ask
me some other question and do not seek to know my race and family, or
you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. I am
full of heaviness, but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in
another person’s house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually.
I shall have one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me,
and saying that my eyes swim with tears because I am heavy with wine.”

Then Penelope answered, “Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty,
whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my
dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs
I should be both more respected and should show a better presence to
the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all our
islands—Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself, are
wooing me against my will and are wasting my estate. I can therefore
show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say
that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-hearted
about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have to
invent stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heaven
put it in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to
begin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said to
them, ‘Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to
marry again immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in
needlework perish unrecorded—till I have finished making a pall for the
hero Laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him.
He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out
without a pall.’ This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I
used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I would
unpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way for
three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I was
now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been
accomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to
the suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angry
with me, so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no. And
now I do not see how I can find any further shift for getting out of
this marriage. My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my
son chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for
he is now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able
to look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an
excellent disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who you
are and where you come from—for you must have had father and mother of
some sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock.”

Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist in
asking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me:
people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as I
have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as
regards your question I will tell you all you ask. There is a fair and
fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled and
there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many different
languages which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave
Eteocretans, Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a
great town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had
a conference with Jove himself.152 Minos was father to Deucalion, whose
son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus
sailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my
brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the
two; hence it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him
hospitality, for the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy,
carrying him out of his course from cape Malea and leaving him in
Amnisus off the cave of Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to
enter and he could hardly find shelter from the winds that were then
raging. As soon as he got there he went into the town and asked for
Idomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had
already set sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I took
him to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had
abundance of everything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with
barley meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and
oxen for them to sacrifice to their heart’s content. They stayed with
me twelve days, for there was a gale blowing from the North so strong
that one could hardly keep one’s feet on land. I suppose some
unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the
wind dropped, and they got away.”

Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept
as she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon the
mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathed
upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so
did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time
sitting by her side. Ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but he
kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much as
quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears. Then, when she had
relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: “Now,
stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you really
did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me,
then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so
also with his companions.”

“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “it is such a long time ago that I can
hardly say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and
went elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect.
Ulysses wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened
by a gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this
there was a device that shewed a dog holding a spotted fawn between his
fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. Every one
marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the
dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was
struggling convulsively to escape.153 As for the shirt that he wore
next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an
onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women
who beheld it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that
I do not know whether Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, or
whether one of his companions had given them to him while he was on his
voyage; or possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him a
present of them, for he was a man of many friends and had few equals
among the Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword of bronze and a beautiful
purple mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down to his feet,
and I sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He had a
servant with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what
he was like; his shoulders were hunched,154 he was dark, and he had
thick curly hair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with
greater familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the most
like-minded with himself.”

Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable
proofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found
relief in tears she said to him, “Stranger, I was already disposed to
pity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my
house. It was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of. I took them
out of the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave him also
the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never welcome him
home again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that
detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention.”

Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure
yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can
hardly blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and
borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even
though he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god.
Still, cease your tears and listen to what I can tell you. I will hide
nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have lately
heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among the
Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he has
begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were
lost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and the
sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the
sun-god’s cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses stuck
to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the
Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him
as though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to
escort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been here
long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering
wealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no
one can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all
this, and he swore to me—making drink-offerings in his house as he did
so—that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would
take Ulysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for there
happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island
of Dulichium, but he showed me all the treasure Ulysses had got
together, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep
his family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to
Dodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from the high oak tree, and know
whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or
in secret. So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is
close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer;
nevertheless I will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is
the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of
Ulysses to which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely
come to pass. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end
of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here.”

“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you
shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses
will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
as that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters in
the house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them
on their way home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make
him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm and
quiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint him again,
that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus. It
shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil
to him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house. For
how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to
others of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I let
you dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad? Men live but for a
little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill
so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they
are dead, but he that is righteous and deals righteously, the people
tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call him blessed.”

Ulysses answered, “Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the
day that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I will
lie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after
night have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for
morning. Nor, again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall not let
any of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you
have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble
as I have, I will allow her to wash them.”

To this Penelope said, “My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet
came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such
admirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the house a most
respectable old woman—the same who received my poor dear husband in her
arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She is very
feeble now, but she shall wash your feet.” “Come here,” said she,
“Euryclea, and wash your master’s age-mate; I suppose Ulysses’ hands
and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of
us dreadfully fast.”

On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began
to weep and made lamentation saying, “My dear child, I cannot think
whatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever more
god-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you. No one in the whole
world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs
when you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see your
son grow up to take after you: yet see how he has prevented you alone
from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt the women in
some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all
these sluts here have been gibing at you. I do not wonder at your not
choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have
insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope
has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope’s sake
and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of
compassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attend
to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before
now, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was so like
Ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.”

“Those who have seen us both,” answered Ulysses, “have always said we
were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.”

Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his
feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath
was warm enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away
from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold
of his leg she would recognise a certain scar which it bore, whereon
the whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon as she began washing
her master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by
a wild boar when he was hunting on Mt. Parnassus with his excellent
grandfather Autolycus—who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer
in the whole world—and with the sons of Autolycus. Mercury himself had
endowed him with this gift, for he used to burn the thigh bones of
goats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his companionship. It
happened once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found the child
of his daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set
the infant upon his knees and said, “Autolycus, you must find a name
for your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.”

“Son-in-law and daughter,” replied Autolycus, “call the child thus: I
am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place and
another, both men and women; so name the child ‘Ulysses,’ or the child
of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother’s family on
Mt. Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present and
will send him on his way rejoicing.”

Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from
Autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.
His grandmother Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his
head, and both his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to
get dinner ready, and they did as he told them. They brought in a five
year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints;
these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them;
they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. Thus
through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and
every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the
sun set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of
sleep.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of
Autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too.
They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy
upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields,
fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they came to a
mountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the
beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolycus,
among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he had a long spear
in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thick
brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it,
nor could the sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick
with fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and the
hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he
rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay
with fire flashing from his eyes. Ulysses was the first to raise his
spear and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick
for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a
gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone. As for the boar,
Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went
right through him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the life
went out of him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the
carcass of the boar, and bound Ulysses’ wound; then, after saying a
spell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But
when Autolycus and his sons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made
him some splendid presents, and sent him back to Ithaca with much
mutual good will. When he got back, his father and mother were rejoiced
to see him, and asked him all about it, and how he had hurt himself to
get the scar; so he told them how the boar had ripped him when he was
out hunting with Autolycus and his sons on Mt. Parnassus.

As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well
hold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. The leg
fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the
water was spilt on the ground; Euryclea’s eyes between her joy and her
grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught
Ulysses by the beard and said, “My dear child, I am sure you must be
Ulysses himself, only I did not know you till I had actually touched
and handled you.”

As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her
that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to look
in that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva had
diverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with
his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,
“Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own
breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last come to
my own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to
recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it to any
one else in the house, for if you do I tell you—and it shall surely
be—that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will
not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other
women.”

“My child,” answered Euryclea, “what are you talking about? You know
very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold my
tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay
my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into
your hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who have
been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless.”

And Ulysses answered, “Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I am
well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your
tongue and leave everything to heaven.”

As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water,
for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and
anointed him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm
himself, and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began talking
to him and said:

“Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another
matter. It is indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep
in spite of sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such
unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties and
looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during the
whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie
awake thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to the most incessant and
cruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in
the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many a
plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own
child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in
its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard
my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard
to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is
not now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing
me and making me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was still
young, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my
husband’s house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to
do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his
property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret it for
me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out of
a trough,155 and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a great
eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak into
the neck of each of them till he had killed them all. Presently he
soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;
whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so
piteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he
came back again, and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with
human voice, and told me to leave off crying. ‘Be of good courage,’ he
said, ‘daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen
that shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no
longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who
will bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.’ On this I woke, and
when I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as
usual.”

“This dream, Madam,” replied Ulysses, “can admit but of one
interpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be
fulfilled? The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single
one of them will escape.”

And Penelope answered, “Stranger, dreams are very curious and
unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come
true. There are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies
proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that come
through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn
mean something to those that see them. I do not think, however, that my
own dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should be
most thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say—and lay
my saying to your heart—the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened
day that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to
hold a tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the
court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship is
built; he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the
whole twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and
whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow
through all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house of
my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so, I
doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.”

Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer your
tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow,
handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron.”

To this Penelope said, “As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk to
me, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do
permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on
earth a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and recline
upon that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from
the day Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name.”

She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her
maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva
shed sweet sleep over her eyelids.




BOOK XX


ULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP—PENELOPE’S PRAYER TO DIANA—THE TWO SIGNS FROM
HEAVEN—EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE—THE SUITORS DINE—CTESIPPUS THROWS
AN OX’S FOOT AT ULYSSES—THEOCLYMENUS FORETELLS DISASTER AND LEAVES THE
HOUSE.


Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on the
top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten,
and Eurynome156 threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself down.
There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which he
should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the
habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling
and laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very angry, and he
doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and
there, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors.
His heart growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and
shows her teeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with
anger at the evil deeds that were being done: but he beat his breast
and said, “Heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day
when the terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in
silence till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made
sure of being killed.”

Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front
of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that
he may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himself
about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he
was, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked
suitors. But by and by Minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of
a woman, and hovered over his head saying, “My poor unhappy man, why do
you lie awake in this way? This is your house: your wife is safe inside
it, and so is your son who is just such a young man as any father may
be proud of.”

“Goddess,” answered Ulysses, “all that you have said is true, but I am
in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitors
single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are. And there
is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposing
that with Jove’s and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must
ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it
is all over.”

“For shame,” replied Minerva, “why, any one else would trust a worse
ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less
wise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you
throughout in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though
there were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you
should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you.
But go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you
shall be out of your troubles before long.”

As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to
Olympus.

While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that
eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping
she prayed to Diana saying, “Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove,
drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch
me up and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the
mouths of over-flowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus.
The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods
killed them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them,
and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them to
excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them an
imposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of
accomplishment; but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see
Jove about getting them married (for well does he know both what shall
happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and
spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even so I
wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide me from mortal sight,
or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go even beneath
the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses only, and
without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, no
matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so
long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in
slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me
even in my dreams. This very night methought there was one lying by my
side who was like Ulysses as he was when he went away with his host,
and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream, but the very truth
itself.”

On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and
it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by
his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had
lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock’s
hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,
saying “Father Jove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and
sea to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me,
give me a sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are
now waking within the house, and let me have another sign of some kind
from outside.”

Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up
among the clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad
when he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman
from hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another
sign. There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind
wheat and barley which are the staff of life. The others had ground
their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet
finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard
the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.
“Father Jove,” said she, “you, who rule over heaven and earth, you have
thundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and this
means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poor
servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that the
suitors dine in the house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with labour
of grinding meal for them, and I hope they may never have another
dinner anywhere at all.”

Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’s
speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should
avenge himself on the suitors.

Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about
his shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a
doughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the
threshold of the cloister and said to Euryclea, “Nurse, did you make
the stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let
him shift for himself?—for my mother, good woman though she is, has a
way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting
others who are in reality much better men.”

“Do not find fault child,” said Euryclea, “when there is no one to find
fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked:
your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said he
would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make
one for him, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he would
not sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having an
undressed bullock’s hide and some sheepskins put for him in the
cloister and I threw a cloak over him myself.”157

Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans
were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not
alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maids
and said, “Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and
sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the
seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean out
the mixing-jugs and the cups, and go for water from the fountain at
once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early, for
it is a feast day.”

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to
work about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors
also came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returned
from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three
best pigs he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises, and
then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses, “Stranger, are the suitors
treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?”

“May heaven,” answered Ulysses, “requite to them the wickedness with
which they deal high-handedly in another man’s house without any sense
of shame.”

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for
he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he
had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse,
and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. “Are you still here,
stranger,” said he, “to pester people by begging about the house? Why
can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding
before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without
any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the
Achaeans, as well as here?”

Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third
man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and
some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to
take people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made his
heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to
the swineherd. “Who, Swineherd,” said he, “is this stranger that is
lately come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where does
he come from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man,
but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it so
pleases them.”

As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
“Good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be very
poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. Father
Jove, of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children,
yet you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat
came over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he
reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags as
this man’s are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he is
already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master,
who made me his stockman when I was quite young among the
Cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; no one could have done
better with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn;
nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who
take no heed to his son though he is in the house, and fear not the
wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide Ulysses’ property
among them because he has been away so long. I have often thought—only
it would not be right while his son is living—of going off with the
cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still
harder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds. My
position is intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put
myself under the protection of some other chief, only that I believe my
poor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of
the house.”

“Stockman,” answered Ulysses, “you seem to be a very well-disposed
person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will
tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief of
all gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses
shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here.”

“If Jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you should
see how I would do my very utmost to help him.”

And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to
murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand—an
eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, “My friends,
this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to
dinner instead.”

The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the
benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every
man his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in the bread
baskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine. Then they laid
their hands upon the good things that were before them.

Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that
was paved with stone;158 he gave him a shabby looking seat at a little
table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought to
him, with his wine in a gold cup. “Sit there,” said he, “and drink your
wine among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and blows
of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to Ulysses,
and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your hands and
your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief.”

The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his
speech; then Antinous said, “We do not like such language but we will
put up with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If
Jove had let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now.”

Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the
heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the
Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo.

Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man
his portion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited at
table gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for
Telemachus had told them to do so.

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their
insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against
them. Now there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name
was Ctesippus, and who came from Same. This man, confident in his great
wealth, was paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to the
suitors, “Hear what I have to say. The stranger has already had as
large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor
reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I will,
however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have
something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses’
servants.”

As he spoke he picked up a heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in which
it lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little
aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion159 as he did
so, and it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to
Ctesippus, “It is a good thing for you,” said he, “that the stranger
turned his head so that you missed him. If you had hit him I should
have run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to
see about getting you buried rather than married in this house. So let
me have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am grown up
now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,
instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I have long
seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I have
put up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no
further violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far
rather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after day—guests
insulted, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an
unseemly way.”

They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said,
“No one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it,
for it is quite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the
stranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house; I
would say, however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother, which
I trust may commend itself to both. ‘As long,’ I would say, ‘as you had
ground for hoping that Ulysses would one day come home, no one could
complain of your waiting and suffering160 the suitors to be in your
house. It would have been better that he should have returned, but it
is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all
this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,
and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you will
yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink
in peace, while your mother will look after some other man’s house, not
yours.’”

To this Telemachus answered, “By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of
my unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is
wandering in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my
mother’s marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she
will, and I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare
not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her own
wishes. Heaven forbid that I should do this.”

Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.
Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and
their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this and
said, “Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud of
darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with
tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are
full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted
out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land.”

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus
then said, “This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark
here.”

But Theoclymenus said, “Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an
understanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for I
see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are
insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be
able to escape.”

He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him
welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
Telemachus by laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to
him, “Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill
for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here
is another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet. Let me
persuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and
send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring.”

Telemachus gave him no heed, but sat silently watching his father,
expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.

Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat
placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear
what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid
much merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had
sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing
can be conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a
brave man were soon to lay before them—for they had brought their doom
upon themselves.




BOOK XXI


THE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS
AND PHILOETIUS


Minerva now put it in Penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their
skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and
got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle of
ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of
the house, where her husband’s treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought
iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of
deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he had met in
Lacedaemon—Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in with one another
in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying in
order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for the
Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had
sailed away with them and with their shepherds. In quest of these
Ulysses took a long journey while still quite young, for his father and
the other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover them. Iphitus had
gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that he had
lost, and the mule foals that were running with them. These mares were
the death of him in the end, for when he went to the house of Jove’s
son, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, Hercules
to his shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he feared not
heaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had set
before Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the
mares himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and
gave him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which
on his death had been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him in
return a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning of a fast
friendship, although they never visited at one another’s houses, for
Jove’s son Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so. This bow,
then, given him by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by Ulysses when
he sailed for Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home, but
had left it behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend.

Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the
carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get
it quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the
doors. She loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the
key, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the
doors;161 these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing in a
meadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests
stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with
fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow
case from the peg on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees,
weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her
tears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where the suitors
were, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that
were inside it. Along with her came her maidens, bearing a chest that
contained much iron and bronze which her husband had won as prizes.
When she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts
supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her face,
and with a maid on either side of her. Then she said:

“Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of
this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other
pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize
that you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow of
Ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his
arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will I follow and quit this
house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. But
even so I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.”

As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron
before the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had
bidden him. Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master’s
bow, but Antinous scolded them. “You country louts,” said he, “silly
simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by
crying in this way? She has enough to grieve her in the loss of her
husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go
outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors
shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it
no light matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man of
us all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember
him, though I was then only a child.”

This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to
string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to be
the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses,
whom he was dishonouring in his own house—egging the others on to do so
also.

Then Telemachus spoke. “Great heavens!” he exclaimed, “Jove must have
robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she
will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying
myself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the
contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman
whose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in
Ithaca nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what need
have I to speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no excuses
for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I too
will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the
iron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger,
not if I can win the prizes which my father won before me.”

As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,
and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row,
in a long groove which he had dug for them, and had made straight by
line.162 Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was
surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though he had never
seen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavement
to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his
might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he had
hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was trying for
the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a sign
to check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:

“Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too
young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to
hold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are
stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled.”

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led
into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow.
Then he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous
said:

“Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the
place at which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine.”

The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. He
was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the
mixing-bowl. 163 He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and was
indignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow and
arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he could
not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work,
they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, “My
friends, I cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take
the life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die
than to live after having missed the prize that we have so long striven
for, and which has brought us so long together. Some one of us is even
now hoping and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen
this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some
other woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer
and whose lot it is to win her.”

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,164 with
the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his seat
again on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him
saying:

“Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous and
intolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bow
take the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend
it yourself? True, you were not born to be an archer, but there are
others who will soon string it.”

Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, “Look sharp, light a fire in
the court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us
also a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let us
warm the bow and grease it—we will then make trial of it again, and
bring the contest to an end.”

Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside
it. He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the
house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but
they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless
there still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders
among the suitors and much the foremost among them all.

Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and
Ulysses followed them. When they had got outside the gates and the
outer yard, Ulysses said to them quietly:

“Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am in
doubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner of
men would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back
here all of a sudden? Say which you are disposed to do—to side with the
suitors, or with Ulysses?”

“Father Jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that you might so
ordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should see
with what might and main I would fight for him.”

In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return;
when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses
said, “It is I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at
last, in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country. I find
that you two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so, for
I have not heard any of the others praying for my return. To you two,
therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be. If heaven shall
deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both of you,
will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me
as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now give
you convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here is
the scar from the boar’s tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on
Mt. Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.”

As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they
had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw
their arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses
kissed their hands and faces in return. The sun would have gone down
upon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and said:

“Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and
tell those who are within. When you go in, do so separately, not both
together; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this
moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to
prevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore,
Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and tell
the women to close the doors of their apartment. If they hear any
groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not
come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.
And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer
court, and to bind them securely at once.”

When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat
that he had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming
it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly
grieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, “I grieve for myself and for
us all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not
care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in
Ithaca and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being so
inferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. This
will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.”

“It shall not be so, Eurymachus,” said Antinous, “and you know it
yourself. Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can
string a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side—as for the axes
they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house
and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we
may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will
tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow—the best he has; we
can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make
trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.”

The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over
the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine
and water and handed it round after giving every man his
drink-offering. Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk
each as much as he desired, Ulysses craftily said:—

“Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am
minded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who has
just spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and
leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give
victory to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow that
I may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether I
still have as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel and
neglect have made an end of it.”

This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,
Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “Wretched creature, you
have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to
think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No other
beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among
ourselves; the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does
with all those who drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the
Centaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among the
Lapithae. When the wine had got into his head, he went mad and did ill
deeds about the house of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were
there assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and
nostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house,
so he went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of
understanding. Henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind and
the centaurs, but he brought it upon himself through his own
drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that it will go hardly with
you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any one here,
for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every one
that comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep
quiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger than yourself.”

Penelope then spoke to him. “Antinous,” said she, “it is not right that
you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house.
If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of
Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make
me his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind:
none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all
reason.”

“Queen Penelope,” answered Eurymachus, “we do not suppose that this man
will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest
some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should go
gossiping about and say, ‘These suitors are a feeble folk; they are
paying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them was
able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strung
it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.’ This is what will be
said, and it will be a scandal against us.”

“Eurymachus,” Penelope answered, “people who persist in eating up the
estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect
others to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk as
you think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built, he says
moreover that he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and let us see
whether he can string it or no. I say—and it shall surely be—that if
Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him a
cloak and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and
robbers, and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals, and will see
him sent safely wherever he wants to go.”

Then Telemachus said, “Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or in
the islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any one
have the bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or the
other, not even though I choose to make the stranger a present of the
bow outright, and let him take it away with him. Go, then, within the
house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your
distaff, and the ordering of your servants. This bow is a man’s matter,
and mine above all others, for it is I who am master here.”

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in
her heart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she
mourned her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her
eyelids.

The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but
the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one
of them said, “You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you out
of your wits? If Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your
own boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry
you to death.”

Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow
down then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other
side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, “Father Eumaeus,
bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you
with stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two. I
wish I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as
I am than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for
they mean mischief.”

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put
them in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on
and placed it in the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he called
Euryclea apart and said to her, “Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to
close the doors of the women’s apartments. If they hear any groaning or
uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out,
but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work.”

Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’s
apartments.

Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the
outer court. There was a ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in the
gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again,
resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who
had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about,
and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into
its two horns during his absence. Then would one turn towards his
neighbour saying, “This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either he has
got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike
style does the old vagabond handle it.”

Another said, “I hope he may be no more successful in other things than
he is likely to be in stringing this bow.”

But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung
it as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes
the twisted gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand to
prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the
twittering of a swallow. The suitors were dismayed, and turned colour
as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a
sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen that the
son of scheming Saturn had sent him.

He took an arrow that was lying upon the table165—for those which the
Achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—he
laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow
and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. When he had taken
aim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes of
the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through them,
and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to Telemachus:

“Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what I
aimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong,
and not as the suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time for
the Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and then
otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the
crowning ornaments of a banquet.”

As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on
his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.




BOOK XXII


THE KILLING OF THE SUITORS—THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVES
ARE MADE TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.


Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement
with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on to
the ground at his feet and said, “The mighty contest is at an end. I
will now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark
which no man has yet hit.”

On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up a
two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.
He had no thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would think
that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill
him? The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean
through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from his
hand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. He kicked
the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and
roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground.166
The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit;
they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked
everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear,
and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily. “Stranger,” said they, “you
shall pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see no other
contest; you are a doomed man; he whom you have slain was the foremost
youth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed
him.”

Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by
mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of
every one of them. But Ulysses glared at them and said:

“Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You have
wasted my substance,167 have forced my women servants to lie with you,
and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have feared
neither God nor man, and now you shall die.”

They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round
about to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone
spoke.

“If you are Ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said is just. We
have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous who
was the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was all
his doing. It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so
much care about that; what he wanted was something quite different, and
Jove has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son and to be
chief man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met the death which
was his due, spare the lives of your people. We will make everything
good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten
and drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, and
we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened.
Until we have done this no one can complain of your being enraged
against us.”

Ulysses again glared at him and said, “Though you should give me all
that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, I
will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must
fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall.”

Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:

“My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where he
is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us then
show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from
his arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the
pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise
such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting.”

As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,
and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot
an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself
in his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.
The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote the
earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked the
stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.

Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and
get him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and
struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and
went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and
struck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away from
him, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if he
stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hack
at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at a run, and
immediately was at his father’s side. Then he said:

“Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet for
your temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour
for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.”

“Run and fetch them,” answered Ulysses, “while my arrows hold out, or
when I am alone they may get me away from the door.”

Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where
the armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and four
brass helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed to
his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the
swineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near Ulysses.
Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the
suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows
gave out, he set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by
the door post, and hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders;
on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest of
horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it,168 and he grasped two
redoubtable bronze-shod spears.

Now there was a trap door169 on the wall, while at one end of the
pavement170 there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this
exit was closed by a well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand
by this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a
time. But Agelaus shouted out, “Cannot some one go up to the trap door
and tell the people what is going on? Help would come at once, and we
should soon make an end of this man and his shooting.”

“This may not be, Agelaus,” answered Melanthius, “the mouth of the
narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. One
brave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what I
will do, I will bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it is
there that Ulysses and his son have put them.”

On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-room
of Ulysses’ house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets
and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to
the suitors. Ulysses’ heart began to fail him when he saw the
suitors171 putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. He saw
the greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, “Some one of the
women inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be
Melanthius.”

Telemachus answered, “The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I left
the store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than I
have. Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the
women who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the
son of Dolius.”

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the
store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to
Ulysses who was beside him, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that
scoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store
room. Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall I
bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many
wrongs that he has done in your house?”

Ulysses answered, “Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check,
no matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius’ hands
and feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the door
fast behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him
close up to the rafters from a high bearing-post,172 that he may linger
on in an agony.”

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the
store room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was
busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two
took their stand on either side of the door and waited. By and by
Melanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted
shield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when he was young,
but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become
unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and
threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet well
behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses
had told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him
up from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him
did you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus saying, “Melanthius, you will
pass the night on a soft bed as you deserve. You will know very well
when morning comes from the streams of Oceanus, and it is time for you
to be driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on.”

There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on
their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take
their places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the
cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the
body of the court were still both brave and many. Then Jove’s daughter
Minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, “Mentor, lend me your help,
and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns he has done
you. Besides, you are my age-mate.”

But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the
other side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first to
reproach her. “Mentor,” he cried, “do not let Ulysses beguile you into
siding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: when
we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. You
shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will
take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with
Ulysses’ property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor
your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of
Ithaca.”

This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very
angrily.173 “Ulysses,” said she, “your strength and prowess are no
longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the
Trojans about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those
days, and it was through your stratagem that Priam’s city was taken.
How comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are
on your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house?
Come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of
Alcimus shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred
upon him.”

But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still
further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew
up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in
the form of a swallow.

Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,
Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon
the suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives
they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen
under the arrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, “My
friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after
having done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the doors
unsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your
spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by
killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the
others.”

They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of
no effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; the
pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had
avoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, “My
friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle of
them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us
outright.”

They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while
the stockman killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the others
drew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained
their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.

The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their
weapons for the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of the
cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of
another struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the top
skin from off Telemachus’s wrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze
Eumaeus’s shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell to
the ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of
suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus
Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and
taunted him saying, “Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so
foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your
speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present of
this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when he
was begging about in his own house.”

Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a
spear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in
the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell forward
full on his face upon the ground. Then Minerva from her seat on the
rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.
They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddened
by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. As
eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on
the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them,
for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the
sport—even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite
them on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their brains were
being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.

Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, “Ulysses I beseech
you have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women
in your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. I
saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their
folly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die
without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no
thanks for all the good that I did.”

Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “If you were their
sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be
long before I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have
children by her. Therefore you shall die.”

With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when
he was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he
struck Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling
in the dust while he was yet speaking.

The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes—he who had been forced by the
suitors to sing to them—now tried to save his life. He was standing
near towards the trap door,174 and held his lyre in his hand. He did
not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar
of Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and
Ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go
straight up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemed
it best to embrace Ulysses’ knees. So he laid his lyre on the ground
between the mixing bowl 175 and the silver-studded seat; then going up
to Ulysses he caught hold of his knees and said, “Ulysses, I beseech
you have mercy on me and spare me. You will be sorry for it afterwards
if you kill a bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can. I make
all my lays myself, and heaven visits me with every kind of
inspiration. I would sing to you as though you were a god, do not
therefore be in such a hurry to cut my head off. Your own son
Telemachus will tell you that I did not want to frequent your house and
sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many and too
strong for me, so they made me.”

Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. “Hold!” he
cried, “the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medon
too, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or
Eumaeus has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you
were raging about the court.”

Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a
seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly
flayed heifer’s hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus,
and laid hold of his knees.

“Here I am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore, and tell
your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors for
having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to
yourself.”

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “Fear not; Telemachus has saved
your life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how
greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore,
outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of
the slaughter—you and the bard—while I finish my work here inside.”

The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down
by Jove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting
that they would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court
carefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was
still living, but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in
their blood. They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of
the sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the
heat of the sun makes an end of them. Even so were the suitors lying
all huddled up one against the other.

Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, “Call nurse Euryclea; I have something
to say to her.”

Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room. “Make
haste,” said he, “you old woman who have been set over all the other
women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you.”

When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s room
and came out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the corpses
bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just been
devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so
that he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head to
foot with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of
blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great
deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, “Old woman,” said he,
“rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about
it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven’s doom and
their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they
respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came
near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for their
wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in the
house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent.”176

“I will tell you the truth, my son,” answered Euryclea. “There are
fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding
wool, and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all177 have
misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to
Penelope. They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only
lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the
female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that has
happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep.”

“Do not wake her yet,” answered Ulysses, “but tell the women who have
misconducted themselves to come to me.”

Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to
Ulysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the
swineherd. “Begin,” said he, “to remove the dead, and make the women
help you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables
and seats. When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take
the women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the
outer court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite
dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used
to lie in secret with the suitors.”

On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one
another in the gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them do
their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When they had
done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and
water, while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and
dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out
of doors. Then when they had made the whole place quite clean and
orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space
between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they
could not get away: and Telemachus said to the other two, “I shall not
let these women die a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my
mother, and used to sleep with the suitors.”

So saying he made a ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that
supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the
building, at a good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touch
the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been
set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and
a terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their
heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.178 Their
feet moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.

As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut
off his hands and his feet.

When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back
into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old
nurse Euryclea, “Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and
fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go,
moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and also
all the maidservants that are in the house.”

“All that you have said is true,” answered Euryclea, “but let me bring
you some clean clothes—a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags on
your back any longer. It is not right.”

“First light me a fire,” replied Ulysses.

She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses
thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and
pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders
and taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like to
weep, for he remembered every one of them.179




BOOK XXIII


PENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND—EARLY IN THE MORNING
ULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.


Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear
husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet
were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her
head to speak to her. “Wake up Penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed,
“and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this
long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has
killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating
up his estate and ill treating his son.”

“My good nurse,” answered Penelope, “you must be mad. The gods
sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make
foolish people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing
to you; for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you
thus mock me when I have trouble enough already—talking such nonsense,
and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my
eyes and closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day my
poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back again
into the women’s room; if it had been any one else who had woke me up
to bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe
scolding. As it is your age shall protect you.”

“My dear child,” answered Euryclea, “I am not mocking you. It is quite
true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger
whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus
knew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father’s secret
that he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.”

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,
and wept for joy. “But my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me;
if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome
the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there
always were?”

“I was not there,” answered Euryclea, “and do not know; I only heard
them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and
huddled up in a corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, till
your son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found
Ulysses standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all
round him, one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you
could have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and
filth, and looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled
up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a
great fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call
you, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all; for
now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband
is come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his
revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him.”

“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “do not exult too confidently over all
this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come
home—more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both of
us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is
angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end
of them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor
poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end in
consequence of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away from the
Achaean land; he will never return home again.”

Then nurse Euryclea said, “My child, what are you talking about? but
you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your
husband is never coming, although he is in the house and by his own
fire side at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof;
when I was washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave
him, and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not
let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will
make this bargain with you—if I am deceiving you, you may have me
killed by the most cruel death you can think of.”

“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “however wise you may be you can hardly
fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search of
my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has
killed them.”

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and
question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister,
she sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right
angles180 [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near
one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see
what his brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time
she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked
him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his
shabby clothes and failed to recognise him,181 till Telemachus began to
reproach her and said:

“Mother—but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name—why
do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by his
side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other woman
could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her
after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;
but your heart always was as hard as a stone.”

Penelope answered, “My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can
find no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I
cannot even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is
Ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one
another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are
alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others.”

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, “Let your mother put me
to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,
because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
another—even though he was not one who would leave many friends to take
up his quarrel—the man who has killed him must still say good bye to
his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay
of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have you
consider this matter.”

“Look to it yourself, father,” answered Telemachus, “for they say you
are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other
mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right good
will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
out.”

“I will say what I think will be best,” answered Ulysses. “First wash
and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and
dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that
if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going
along the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a
wedding in the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors
will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my
own land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven
vouchsafes us shall seem wisest.”

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed
and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took
his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The
house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people
outside said, “I suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her
husband’s property until he comes home.”182

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had
been happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses
in his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him
look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick
on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms;
she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilful
workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva—and
his work is full of beauty—enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding
it. He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat
down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. “My dear,” said he,
“heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever
yet had. No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when
he had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having
gone through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will
sleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard as iron.”

“My dear,” answered Penelope, “I have no wish to set myself up, nor to
depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well
remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he
himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it
with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets.”

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, “Wife, I
am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been
taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found it
a hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god
came and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strong
and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a
marvellous curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There was a
young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour,
and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this with
strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors
strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive
tree and left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root
upwards and then worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully,
straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into
a bed-prop. I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the
centre-post of my bed, at which I worked till I had finished it,
inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched a hide of
crimson leather from one side of it to the other. So you see I know all
about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether
any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its
roots.”

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and
kissed him. “Do not be angry with me Ulysses,” she cried, “you, who are
the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied
us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together;
do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you
thus as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering all the time through
fear that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story;
for there are many very wicked people going about. Jove’s daughter
Helen would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country,
if she had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and
bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no
thought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now,
however, that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about
our bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single
maidservant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my
marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I
have been I can mistrust no longer.”

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and
faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who
are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship
with the fury of his winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and
these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on
firm ground and out of danger—even so was her husband welcome to her as
she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from
about his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow
till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise,
and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn to
leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear
her onward to break the day upon mankind.

At last, however, Ulysses said, “Wife, we have not yet reached the end
of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It
is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the
shade of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went
down into Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. But
now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon
of sleep.”

“You shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied Penelope, “now
that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your
country. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me
about the task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it
later, so it is better that I should be told at once.”

“My dear,” answered Ulysses, “why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I
do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide,
carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never
heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know
nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave
me this certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that a
wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel
that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground
and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was
to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the
other. As for myself, he said that death should come to me from the
sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when I was full of
years and peace of mind, and my people should bless me. All this, he
said, should surely come to pass.”

And Penelope said, “If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune.”

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
bed chamber woman Eurynome183 to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by
torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went back,
and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and
made the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep
in the cloisters.

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble
he had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she
was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had
ended his whole story.

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached
the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably
and furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for
to his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he
went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed
all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the
chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet
Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who
bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard the
wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and
terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in
safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove
therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men
perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last he
reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in
a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she
intended making him immortal so that he should never grow old, but she
could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering
he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though
he had been a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country after
having given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was
the last thing about which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold
upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that
Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On
this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,
“Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in
lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home though
I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at last
come together, take care of the property that is in the house. As for
the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take
many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to
make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now
going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has
so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these
instructions, though you have little need of them. At sunrise it will
at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,
therefore,184 and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask no
questions.”185

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus,
Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they opened
the gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now
daylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led
them quickly out of the town.




BOOK XXIV


THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES—ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE
OF LAERTES—THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVA
CONCLUDES A PEACE.


Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his
hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men’s eyes in
sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts
and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. As
bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them
has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the
ghosts whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them down
into the dark abode of death. When they had passed the waters of
Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the
land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell
the souls and shadows of them that can labour no more.

Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of
Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man
of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself.

They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of
Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also
the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of
Aegisthus; and the ghost of Achilles spoke first.

“Son of Atreus,” it said, “we used to say that Jove had loved you
better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain
over many and brave men, when we were all fighting together before
Troy; yet the hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon
you all too early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day
of your renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over your
ashes, and your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas it
has now been your lot to come to a most miserable end.”

“Happy son of Peleus,” answered the ghost of Agamemnon, “for having
died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the
Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the
whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your
chivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever
have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us. Then, when
we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed
and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. The
Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother,
when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and
the sound of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the
Achaeans quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their
ships had not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked
them saying, ‘Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his
mother coming from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of
her son.’

“Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the
old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in
immortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet
voices in lament—calling and answering one another; there was not an
Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights
seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the
eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep with
many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt in
raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes,
horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were
burning, with the tramp as of a great multitude. But when the flames of
heaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak
and laid them in ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a
golden vase to hold them—gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself;
in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had
gone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who
had been closer to you than any other of your comrades now that
Patroclus was no more.

“Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point
jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far
out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born
hereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them to
be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have been
present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird
themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis
offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in death
your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore
among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my
fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the
hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife.”

Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the
ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of
Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to
them at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of
Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to
talk to him.

“Amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fine young men—all
of an age too—that you are come down here under the ground? One could
pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his winds
and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an
end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or
sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city?
Answer my question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember how
I came to your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with
his ships against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume our
voyage, for we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us.”

And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, “Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king
of men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you
fully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about.
Ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not
say point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an
end, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the
trick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room and
began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. ‘Sweethearts,’
said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry
again immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in needlework
perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes,
against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the
women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’ This is
what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon
her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches
again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years without
our finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth
year, in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one
of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in
the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would
or no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had
it washed,186 its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.

“Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his
swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from a
voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
their plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and then after
him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and
leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar. He came
so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among
us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured both being
struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; but
when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachus
took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors
behind them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a
quantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this
was the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the
bow—nor nearly do so. When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses,
we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him, no matter
what he might say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it. When he
had got it in his hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrow
through the iron. Then he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured
his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killed
Antinous, and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly
darts and they fell thick on one another. It was plain that some one of
the gods was helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main
throughout the cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as
our brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our
blood. This, Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are
lying still uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends at
home do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out
and wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according
to the offices due to the departed.”

“Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes,” replied the ghost of Agamemnon, “you
are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare
excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
Penelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue
shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be
welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How far
otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed
her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has
brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones.”

Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the
bowels of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the
town and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which
he had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with a
lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept
and sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman,
who looked after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses got there,
he said to his son and to the other two:

“Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
recognise me after so long an absence.”

He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who
went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to
make trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he
did not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for
they were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the
place where the old man had told them; he therefore found his father
alone, hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and very
shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him
from the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goat
skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When Ulysses saw
him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall
pear tree and began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss
him, and tell him all about his having come home, or whether he should
first question him and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it
best to be crafty with him, so in this mind he went up to his father,
who was bending down and digging about a plant.

“I see, sir,” said Ulysses, “that you are an excellent gardener—what
pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a
fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of
your attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I
say that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are
old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle
that your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and
figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble
birth. I should have said that you were one of those who should wash
well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do;
but tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose
garden are you working? Tell me also about another matter. Is this
place that I have come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said
so, but he was a dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story
out when I was asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was
still living, or was already dead and in the house of Hades. Believe me
when I tell you that this man came to my house once when I was in my
own country and never yet did any stranger come to me whom I liked
better. He said that his family came from Ithaca and that his father
was Laertes, son of Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making him
welcome to all the abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave
him all customary presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and
a cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelve
light cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve
cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal
number of shirts. To all this I added four good looking women skilled
in all useful arts, and I let him take his choice.”

His father shed tears and answered, “Sir, you have indeed come to the
country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked
people. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If
you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have
entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply
when you left him—as would have been only right considering what you
had already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is
it since you entertained this guest—my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas!
He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea have
eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents,
could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could
his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as
was natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the
offices due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know.
Who and whence are you—tell me of your town and parents? Where is the
ship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you a
passenger on some other man’s ship, and those who brought you here have
gone on their way and left you?”

“I will tell you everything,” answered Ulysses, “quite truly. I come
from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, who
is the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off
my course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here
against my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open
country outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses left
my country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he left
me. The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoiced
to see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have
another friendly meeting and exchange presents.”

A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both
hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey
head, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched,
and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang
towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, “I am he,
father, about whom you are asking—I have returned after having been
away for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation—we have
no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing the
suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes.”

“If you really are my son Ulysses,” replied Laertes, “and have come
back again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as
shall convince me.”

“First observe this scar,” answered Ulysses, “which I got from a boar’s
tusk when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my mother had sent me
to Autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presents which when he
was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point out
to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all
about them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all,
and you told me their names and what they all were. You gave me
thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also
said you would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted
between each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of
heaven has been laid heavy upon them.”

Laertes’ strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which
his son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to
support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he
came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, “O father
Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have
really been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I am
much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up here
directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the
cities of the Cephallenians.”

Ulysses answered, “Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told
Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready
as soon as possible.”

Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got
there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting
up meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took
Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She put him on
a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposing
presence, making him taller and stouter than before. When he came back
his son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said
to him, “My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much
taller and better-looking.”

Laertes answered, “Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I
were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took
Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I
then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, I
should have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors.
I should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced
to see it.”

Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his
proper place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by and
by old Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their
mother, the Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was
growing old, had been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and were
certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses
scolded them good naturedly and said, “Sit down to your dinner, old
man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin
for some time and have been waiting for you.”

Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. “Sir,” said
he, seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “we have
long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after
we had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper
you.187 But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, or
shall we send some one to tell her?”

“Old man,” answered Ulysses, “she knows already, so you need not
trouble about that.” On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius
gathered round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after
the other; then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their
father.

While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round
the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the
suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.
They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the
fishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met angrily
in the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithes
rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son
Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,
weeping bitterly, “My friends, this man has done the Achaeans great
wrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he
has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been
killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and
doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule,
or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an
everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons
and brothers. For my own part I should have no more pleasure in life,
but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after them, before
they can cross over to the main land.”

He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard
Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.
Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle
of the assembly, and Medon said, “Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did
not do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw an
immortal god take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This god
appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously
about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on
one another.”

On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of
Mastor, rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both
past and future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty,
saying,

“Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as
they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we bade
you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the
wantonness of their hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring the
wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however,
let it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out against
Ulysses, or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your
own heads.”

This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at
once left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the
speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;
they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led
them on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the murder of
his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself to
perish in his attempt.

Then Minerva said to Jove, “Father, son of Saturn, king of kings,
answer me this question—What do you propose to do? Will you set them
fighting still further, or will you make peace between them?”

And Jove answered, “My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by your
own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the
suitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will be
most reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them
swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue to
rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of
their sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends as
heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.”

This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus.

Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by
saying, “Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up to
us.” So one of Dolius’s sons went as he was bid. Standing on the
threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, “Here
they are, let us put on our armour at once.”

They put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say Ulysses,
his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did
the same—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they
had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,
Ulysses leading the way.

Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
and voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to his
son Telemachus, “Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an
engagement, which will show every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgrace
your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the
world over.”

“You say truly, my dear father,” answered Telemachus, “and you shall
see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family.”

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. “Good heavens,” he exclaimed,
“what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and
grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour.”

On this Minerva came close up to him and said, “Son of Arceisius—-best
friend I have in the world—pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove
her father; then poise your spear and hurl it.”

As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed
to her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes’ helmet, and
the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his
armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Meantime Ulysses and his son fell upon the front line of the foe and
smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. “Men of
Ithaca,” she cried, “cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at
once without further bloodshed.”

On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of
the goddess’ voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. But
Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down
like a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire
that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, “Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry
with you.”

Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed
the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace
between the two contending parties.
